for educational use only
Suresh S/O Sadhuji Ghogre (In ... vs The State Of Maharashtra, Thr. ... on 11 January, 2019

Bombay High Court
Suresh S/O Sadhuji Ghogre (In ... vs The State Of Maharashtra, Thr. ... on 11 January, 2019
Bench: S.B. Shukre
apeal.361.16.jud

1

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY
NAGPUR BENCH, NAGPUR
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.361 OF 2016
Appellant

:

Suresh s/o Sadhuji Ghogre,
Aged about 60 years, Occu. Electrician,
R/o Dasara Road, Gondhilipura,
Near the House of Rajaram Admane, Nagpur.
Presently lodged at Central Prison, Nagpur.
-- Versus --

Respondent

:

The State of Maharashtra,
through Police Station Officer,
Police Station Kotwali, Nagpur,
Tah. & Dist. Nagpur.
=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
Shri R.M. Daga, Advocate for the Appellant.
Smt. A.R. Kulkarni, A.P.P. for the Respondent/State.
=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
CORAM

: S.B. SHUKRE & S.M. MODAK, JJ.

RESERVED ON
PRONOUNCED ON

: 22nd NOVEMBER, 2018.
: 11th JANUARY, 2019.

ORAL JUDGMENT :- (Per S.M. Modak, J.)

The appellant sole accused is convicted of committing the murder of one Shailesh Balkrishna
Junghare. He was assaulted with the help of knife on 23/09/2014 at about 7.15 p.m. in front of
house of Rajesh Manohar Rendke. On the complaint of one Lukesh Pawar, Kotwali Police Station,
Nagpur initially registered an offence under Section 307 of the Indian Penal Code (for short
hereinafter referred to as 'IPC'). Deceased Shailesh was first taken to the hospital of Dr. Patil and he
died there lateron. Police converted the offence to Section 302 of IPC.
02] This appellant was named in the First Information Report. He was charge-sheeted for the
offence under Section 302 of IPC. Additional Sessions Judge, Nagpur, convicted him to life
imprisonment and a fine of Rs.5,000/- on 30/06/2016. 03] We have heard Shri R.M. Daga, learned
Counsel for the appellant and Mrs. A.R. Kulkarni, learned Additional Public Prosecutor for the
respondent. They have taken us through the evidence. The emphasis of the appellant is entirely on
reducing the sentence from life imprisonment to a lesser imprisonment. There is submission to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54877397/

1

Suresh S/O Sadhuji Ghogre (In ... vs The State Of Maharashtra, Thr. ... on 11 January, 2019

convert the conviction from Section 302 to Section 304 of IPC. The defence has, however, opposed
it.
MOTIVE 04] On going through the evidence, we find that there are six eye-witnesses. In such cases,
motive does not play any important role. Though no motive was attributed, indirectly anger of the
family members of the appellant towards the family of deceased was attributed. The appellant was
having a son by name Jitendra. He had committed suicide by poisoning. One Shrutika Junghare is
the daughter of brother of deceased Shailesh. They used to reside at Nashik. Occasionally, Shrutika
used to visit the house of her deceased uncle at Nagpur. Shrutika and Jitendra came in contact with
each other and Jitendra used to visit the house of the deceased. Deceased's family members were
not comfortable. It was brought to the notice of the appellant-accused. Family members of the
appellant blamed the family members of the deceased for the act of commission of suicide by
Jitendra.
05] On reading cross-examination of the witnesses, defence has suggested dispute between deceased
Shailesh on one hand and Hiraman Nerkar and Hirabai Ugle on the other hand. It was on account of
construction of house of the deceased. Deceased was constructing his new house. It is not in dispute
that it was on the verge of completion. Daughter Anushka [PW-7] and wife Reena [PW- 8] have
admitted about this dispute and even filing of police complaint by deceased (admitted by PW-8
Reena).
EVIDENCE 06] On going through the evidence of seven eye-witnesses, we find that only PW-4 Rafiq
Sheikh, PW-7 Anushka (daughter) and PW-6 Rajesh Randke have supported the assault by the
appellant on the deceased. When the deceased visited his new house on 23/09/2014, the appellant
assaulted him with the help of knife. There is some variance about the exact place of assault, that is
to say the place where the deceased was putting a lock on the door of the house or the spot where he
was putting a lock to the compound gate of the house.

POSTMORTEM EXAMINATION

07]

When

we

have

gone

through

the

postmortem

examination report, we find four injuries mentioned in Column No.17. There are three wounds, one
is stab injury, second is surgical stab intervention and third is incised wound, whereas there was one
contused abrasion on forehead. These three wounds are on chest, abdomen and forehead. Doctor
carrying out postmortem was not examined, probably for the reason that the defence has admitted
the report. Final cause of death is 'stab injury to heart'. There was also stab wound to valves and
cartilages and it is corresponding to external stab wound over front of chest on left side. Neither the
defence has disputed about homicidal death nor there is any other contrary material. There is every
reason to uphold the opinion of the trial Court about homicidal death.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54877397/

2

Suresh S/O Sadhuji Ghogre (In ... vs The State Of Maharashtra, Thr. ... on 11 January, 2019

WEAPON 08] Even, there is a reason to uphold the knife as the weapon for causing all these
injuries. Dr. Nilesh Tumdam, who has examined the seized knife for giving the opinion, was
examined by the prosecution. There is a reason to believe about spot of incident. It is in front of the
house of Rajesh Manohar Rendke on Dasra Road, Pravin Kawale [PW-9] is the spot-panch.
EYE WITNESS 09] Out of the eye witnesses, PW-2 Pawankumar Jais and PW- 3 Rajesh Jain have
resiled from their police statements. They were examined on the point of witnessing the assault.
Witness Pawankumar Jais has totally resiled, whereas the witness Rajesh Jain has at least deposed
about shifting deceasd Shailesh from the spot to the hospital in Auto-Rickshaw. The first informant
Lukesh Pawar [PW-5] has also resiled from the contents of the F.I.R. He and Raja Rendke (probably
PW-6 Rajesh) were chitchatting on 23/09/2014 in between 07:00 p.m and 07:30 p.m. The first
informant Lukesh has deposed from the stage deceased Shailesh came running, whereas PW-6
Rajesh deposed since the assault by the accused on the deceased with the help of knife. During
cross-examination, witness Rajesh has given one answer. Defence has brought the same to our
notice. He heard the voice of deceased Shailesh "Mala Wachwa, Mala Wachwa".
10] Rafiq Sheikh [PW-4] and Anushka [PW-7] have also deposed about witnessing the assault.
Anushka had gone to the spot for calling her father. Deceased had gone to the new house on the
fateful day. PW-4 Rafiq has simply stated about assault by the appellant on the deceased. That is to
say he has not narrated, how the accused came there from, whether there were talks in between
them. Whereas, Anushka has deposed few particulars. The accused- appellant patted the deceased
and when the deceased took a turn, appellant gave a blow of knife on his chest. About this particular
fact also, the appellant claims it as an improvement. 11] The evidence of Rafiq and Anushka was
challenged on the ground of delay in recording of statement and inaction/keeping silent during that
period. Reena, wife of deceased has not witnessed the incident. She got knowledge from daughter
Anushka. The knife was recovered at the instance of the accused and Ravindra Gawane [PW-1] is the
panch. C.A. Report does not suggest of finding out blood of deceased on that knife.
CONCLUSION 12] On reading the entire evidence, we do find that the evidence of eye-witnesses
(particularly of Rafiq and Anushka) proves about the assault on the deceased by the appellant with
the help of knife. Then, we realize the approach of the defence in conducting the appeal. They are
fully aware about the evidence noted above. For this reason, probably they have not pressed hard in
allowing the appeal in toto. Now, we will deal with the main thrust of the appellant on converting
the sentence.
CASELAWS 13] The appellant relied upon the judgment in the case of Sunder Lal vs. State of
Rajasthan reported in (2007) 10 SCC 371 and the case of Tularam vs. The State of Madhya Pradesh
reported in 2018 ALL MR (Cri) 3161 (S.C.). In both these cases, the Hon'ble Supreme Court
converted conviction from Section 302 to Section 304 of IPC. The law on the point of culpable
homicide amounting to murder and that not amounting to murder is discussed therein. The
appellant wants us to give similar benefit to the appellant. 14] We have gone through these two
judgments. It is true that the culpable homicide is defined in Section 299 of IPC. The culpable
homicide is a genus, whereas murder is it's species. All murders are the culpable homicides, but all
culpable homicides are not murders. Defence can be successful in taking out the case from the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54877397/

3

Suresh S/O Sadhuji Ghogre (In ... vs The State Of Maharashtra, Thr. ... on 11 January, 2019

sweep of Section 300 of IPC in two contingencies. One is, if they make out any exception given in
Section 300 of IPC and, secondly, if they make out a case of non-fulfillment of ingredients of clause
firstly to clause fourthly of Section 300 of IPC.
15] In those two contingencies, the culpable homicides will not be murder and the accused is
required to be dealt with as per the punishment prescribed in Section 304 of IPC. In the judgments
referred above, there are certain guidelines as to how to appreciate the evidence. There is emphasis
on single blow of knife, no argument or altercation immediately before the assault in between the
deceased and the appellant, the time of incident being night time and absence of any motive. In the
case of direct evidence, the motive as a circumstance is not so important as in the case of
circumstantial evidence. So, in case of a case based on direct evidence, there can be prosecution
evidence on the point of motive or it may not be there. If, however, such evidence is adduced, then
the duty of the Court is to assess the evidence. Traces of such evidence are present here. The love
affair between Shrutika (niece of deceased) and Jitendra (son of appellant) and displeasure from the
family members of the deceased is shown as a background. PW-8 Reena Junghare, wife of deceased,
had given details of this background. The intimacy in between Shrutika and Jitendra was in the
month of April, 2014. Shrutika had come to Nagpur to the house of her deceased uncle. Then, she
returned to Nashik. Jitendra, son of the appellant, committed suicide in the month of April, 2014.
The prosecution claims that being disturbed due to untimely death of his son Jitendra, the appellant
used to abuse family members of the deceased under the influence of liquor. After reading the
evidence of prosecution witnesses, we do not find the evidence satisfactory on the point of motive.
The prosecution having relied on the backdrop of a particular relationship, could have brought on
record the love affair on one hand and commission of suicide of Jitendra on the other hand. Even,
Shrutika had committed suicide subsequently. But, the evidence is not satisfactory on the point of
connection between commission of suicide by Jitendra and the appellant holding the family
members of the deceased accountable for that suicide on the other hand. So, the connecting link is
not established. Hence, we feel that, motive for appellant to commit murder, being family members
of the deceased responsible for commission of suicide by his son, is not established. This would
make us believe that it is difficult to hold that there was any premeditation or pre-planning on the
part of the appellant to kill the deceased which would in turn necessitate examining thoroughly the
presence of intention or knowledge as contemplated by Section 300 of IPC. 16] In addition to the
age of the appellant being senior citizen is also cited for taking a lenient view. The age will come into
picture after final appreciation of evidence and that too if the offence will fall under the category
'culpable homicide not amounting to murder'. 17] It is true that there are four injuries to the
deceased. One is abrasion on forehead that may be due to fall and there are stab wounds on the
chest and abdomen. The eye witnesses PW-4 Rafiq and PW-7 Anushka have categorically stated
about only one blow of knife. It is very well true that the appellant has not given repeated blows of
knife on the deceased. It has also come in the evidence that appellant ran away after the assault. The
location of the injuries on the body suggests that it was near a vital part of the body. However, which
part of the body, the assault would ultimately affect would depend upon various factors i.e. the
height of deceased and the appellant, the distance in between them at the time of assault, weapon
used, the force applied and finally the intention of the assailant. If the assault is from the very close
distance, there is likelihood of injuring the upper part of the body. Probably, if the assault might
have been on the abdomen or lower part of the body, the result could have been different. Even
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54877397/

4

Suresh S/O Sadhuji Ghogre (In ... vs The State Of Maharashtra, Thr. ... on 11 January, 2019

though, the appellant had brought knife along with him, we do not find that he intended to cause
death of deceased Shailesh. We are taking this view for the reason that there is only single blow, that
there is no argument or altercation immediately earlier to the assault, that there are no repeated
blows even though opportunity was available and that there is absence of evidence of expert
suggesting that the injuries were sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death. 3 rd
clause of Section 300 requires that the bodily injury intended to be inflicted must be sufficient in the
ordinary course of nature to cause death and that means, it must be established by evidence. PW-10
Dr. Nilesh has been examined by the prosecution to prove the nature of weapon used and it's
connection with the stab injury. But, PW-10 does not say anything in this regard and his opinion
vide Exh.66 is also silent on this aspect of the matter. Merely because postmortem is admitted
(Exh.63) by defence, it does not relieve the prosecution to prove the ingredients of Section 300 of
IPC.
18] These facts create a doubt, in our opinion, about intention of the appellant to inflict such injury
as to cause the death of Shailesh or the appellant having intention to deal such an injury as is
sufficient to cause death or the appellant having knowledge that in all probability the injury caused
by him would result in death of the deceased. We infer that the appellant had intention to cause
some injury which possibly may not have caused the death and that it is this element of uncertainty
which takes the case out of the ambit of Section 300 of IPC.
19] On going through the judgment of the trial Court, we do not find that it has considered these
aspects. We intend to disagree with the finding of the trial Court on this aspect of the case. There is
every scope to say that appellant intended to inflict some injury on the deceased and to the
misfortune of both, it has resulted into his death. So, we intend to convert the conviction from
Section 302 to Section 304 of IPC.
20] When we have read the judgment of the trial Court, we do not find any discussion on the point
of fulfillment of the conditions of Section 300 of IPC. The learned trial Judge has discussed about
proof of all the circumstances. He was required to give findings before coming to the conclusion
about the guilt of the accused under Section 302 of IPC. There can be punishment under Section
302 of IPC only when the case falls under either of the clauses of firstly to fourthly of Section 300 of
IPC. Unfortunately, it is not there. For that reason and for the reasons stated above, the appellant
needs to be given a benefit of doubt to the limited extent of his guilt under Section 302 of IPC and
thus we find that the prosecution has succeeded only in proving the guilt of the appellant for an
offence which falls under the scope and ambit of Section 304(I) of IPC.
SENTENCING 21] When we talk about punishment prescribed under Section 304 (I) of IPC, it is of
two kinds. One is life imprisonment or imprisonment up to 10 years and second is fine. Court has to
award appropriate sentence which suits the interest of justice. Law has evolved on mitigating and
aggravating circumstances. 22] No doubt, the act is an offence against society. Anguish of the
appellant (due to commission of suicide by his own young son) towards the family of deceased is
portrayed as a motive, though, it is not sufficiently proved. In nutshell, the incident happened due to
discord between families of appellant and deceased. These family differences need to be considered
as one of the mitigating factors. Though murder took place on public road, it was not a cold blooded
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54877397/

5

Suresh S/O Sadhuji Ghogre (In ... vs The State Of Maharashtra, Thr. ... on 11 January, 2019

murder. At the same time, age of appellant being of 60 years also weighs in his favour. If he is
inflicted with life imprisonment, there are no good chances of his surviving the full term. 23] At the
same time, the interests of legal representatives of deceased need to be protected. As on record,
Reena Shailesh Junghare [PW-8] is the wife and Anushka Shailesh Junghare [PW-7] is the daughter
of deceased. There are no other legal representatives who have come on record. Deceased was aged
about 35 years. He was having long life to live and he must be the breadwinner of the family. His
family members must be undergoing lot of inconveniences after the murder.
24] So, when we have balanced all the factors, we feel that seven years imprisonment will meet the
ends of justice. At the same time, wife Reena and daughter Anushka need to be compensated.
Considering the age of deceased and average earning, we quantify the compensation to the tune of
Rs.5,00,000/-. Appellant may contend weak financial capacity. But, he cannot forget, he is
responsible for the death and ultimately, if he has to live his remainder life openly, he has to arrange
for resources. 25] We are awarding this compensation by invoking the provisions of sub-section (1)
to Section 357 of Cr.P.C. When there is only sentence of fine or fine being part of whole sentence,
Court has to appropriate whole/part of fine amount towards compensation. Whereas, when there is
only sentence of imprisonment (without fine), Court may impose compensation independently by
invoking the provisions of sub-section (3) to Section 357 of Cr.P.C. 26] For offence under Section
304(1) of IPC, there cannot either be imprisonment only or fine only. Further, there are no
pecuniary limitations on the power of Additional Sessions Judge / High Court so far as amount of
fine is concerned. So, we also impose a fine of Rs.5,25,000/- on the appellant. Out of this amount,
Rs.5,00,000/- be paid as compensation to wife Reena Shailesh Junghare and daughter Anushka
Shailesh Junghare in equal proportion. If they will claim compensation through Civil Court, this
amount be considered. If there are other legal representatives of deceased, their claim is not
considered. If they desire, they may approach the Civil Court as per law. Civil Court can decide the
claim of claimants and may consider this amount of compensation while fixing the total
compensation and it's shares, if any occasion arises. For above reasons, we are allowing the appeal
partly and passing following orders :
i. Appeal is partly allowed.
ii. The appellant is convicted for the offence punishable under Section 304(I) of IPC
instead of offence punishable under Section 302 of IPC.
iii. Appellant is directed to suffer rigorous imprisonment for seven years and to pay a
fine of Rs.5,25,000/-. iv. Out of this fine amount, an amount of Rs.5,00,000/- be
paid to Reena Shailesh Junghare and Anushka Shailesh Junghare in equal
proportion.
v. If the appellant fails to pay the amount of fine of Rs.5,25,000/-, he is further
directed to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two years.
vi. Sentences to run concurrently.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54877397/

6

Suresh S/O Sadhuji Ghogre (In ... vs The State Of Maharashtra, Thr. ... on 11 January, 2019

vii. Appellant be given benefit of set off. viii. Amount of fine be deposited in District
Court, Nagpur. As and when deposited, compensation be paid to Reena Shailesh
Junghare and Anushka Shailesh Junghare on proving their identity as per rules.
(S.M. Modak, J.)

(S.B. Shukre, J.)

*sandesh

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54877397/

7

