for educational use only
The State Of West Bengal vs Ashim Ghosh on 3 July, 2019

Calcutta High Court (Appellete Side)
The State Of West Bengal vs Ashim Ghosh on 3 July, 2019
1
Form No. J(1)
IN THE HIGH COURT AT CALCUTTA
CRIMINAL REVISIONAL JURISDICTION
Present:
The Hon'ble Justice Rajasekhar Mantha
G.A. No. 13 of 1988
The State of West Bengal
-VersusAshim Ghosh

For the Appellant:

Mr. Bidyut Kumar Roy,
Ms. Rita Dutta.

For the Respondent: Mr. Tapas Kumar Ghosh,

Mr. Tanmoy Chowdhury.
Heard on:
Judgment on:

July 3, 2019.
July 3, 2019.

Rajasekhar Mantha, J.:

The State has preferred the instant appeal against the judgment and order dated 21st December,
1987 passed by the Sub-Divisional Judicial Magistrate, Hooghly Sadar in Case No. 622 of 1980
under the provisions of Section 3 of the Railway Property (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1966 (Act 29 of
1966).
The case of the prosecution briefly stated is that on 4th August, 1980 at about 8:30 a.m. one S.I.
Aswini Kumar Nath (PW-1) along with S.I. Prafulla Kumar Das (PW-2) and Dudh Nath Mahato,
Rakshok/Constable of RPF (PW-3) visited the shop of the respondent in Government Colony on
Station Road at Bansberia, Hooghly.
A search was conducted in presence of the witnesses, where it is stated specifically by PW-1 "accused
Ashim Ghosh was present at the shop and godown". 25 cut pieces of Tie Bars were recovered from
the said shop-cum-godown. The said Tie Bars were labeled and seized and a seizure list was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126200751/

1

The State Of West Bengal vs Ashim Ghosh on 3 July, 2019

prepared. The accused respondent was arrested and the seized alamat was taken to Bandel R.P.F.
post. A written complaint was subsequently lodged and a criminal proceeding under the provisions
of Section 3 of the Act of 1966 was commenced.
The charge was prepared on 17th June, 1985 and the trial commenced. In course of trial, the
prosecution examined the following witnesses, namely, PW-1, S.I. Aswini Kumar Nath, PW-2, S.I.
Prafulla Kumar Das, PW-3, Constable/Rakshak Dudh Nath Mahato, PW-4, Ram Gopal Paul, Green
Vegetable Vendor at Bansberia Green Vegetable Market, PW-5, Paltu Ghosh, resident of Bansberia
Station Road, PW-6, Subhas Chandra Paul, A.S.I. R.P.C. and PW-7, Dilip Kumar Das, Railway
employee and expert on materials.
There are three vital ingredients to prove commission of offence under Section 3 of the Railway
Property (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1966 - (a) The property in question must be railway property;
(b) the possession, misappropriation or theft of such property must be proved against the accused,
(c) such possession must be unlawful.
In so far as the first ingredient is concerned, I find that out of 25 Tie Bars, 2 Tie Bars were actually
produced in course of trial. The factum of exclusive ownership of the said Tie Bars by the Railways
have been proved by evidence of PW-7, Dilip Kumar Das. He has stated in evidence that the said Tie
Bars are of a nature that are only used by the Railways Engineering Department and none else. He
further deposed that such Bars are issued against confirmed indents with the Railways for its
construction activities. He further stated that such Tie Bars were never auctioned and were in good
useable condition.
Hence, the ownership of the Tie Bars stolen and removed from the exclusive possession of the
Railways has been proved. The accused Ashim Ghosh has been identified as a Biri Binder by Paltu
Ghosh. PW5. Paltu Ghosh is himself an unemployed resident of the area concerned. The accused was found in
terms of the evidence of PW-1 at "the shop room and godown" of the accused respondent.
In his defence and statement under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the
accused-respondent stated that the shop-cum- godown does not belong to him and that it belongs to
one Haripada Das. He further stated in examination under Section 313 that he was standing in front
of the said shop and has noting do with the shoproom/godown or the tie bars. The Railways have
not been able to bring any evidence to show that the accused Ashim Ghosh was either the owner of
the shop or was actually present inside the said shop- cum-godown.
PW-4, who was declared hostile said he did not know whether the shop room/godown was owned by
accused Ashim Ghosh. He was declared also hostile. He said in cross-examination that one
Haripada Das was his tenant and ran a iron scrap selling ship under his tenancy.
PW-6 ASI Subas Chandra Paul stated in cross-examination that accused was not asked to produce
the trade license of this shop. He also said that he did not enquire from the municipality as to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126200751/

2

The State Of West Bengal vs Ashim Ghosh on 3 July, 2019

whether the accused had a trade license in respect of the said shop.
No contemporaneous evidence has either been led in the trial or obtained by the prosecution to
show the exact physical presence of the accused inside the shoproom or his ownership or possession
of the same. The tie bars were not recovered from the person of the accused and no evidence is there
to the effect. The possession of the accused in so far as the said Railway property is concerned, has
not thus been established beyond reasonable doubt, by the prosecution.
The learned Counsel for the State would argue that since it has come out from the evidence of PW-1
and PW-2 and PW- 6 that the accused was present at the shop room-cum-godown, it must be
deemed that he was present inside the shop room and godown and therefore had actual physical
possession of the said Railway property. Admittedly it has also not come in evidence that the
accused was in fact holding any number of the said Bars within his physical possession nor was the
same stated or deposed by the witnesses. No such evidence has come on record from any of the
prosecution witnesses.
The learned Counsel representing the respondent relied upon two decisions one of which this Court
finds to be substantially relevant. The said decision is in the case of Ramanand Yadav - Vs. - Prabhu
Nath Jha & Ors. reported in (2003) 12 S.C.C. 606 at paragraph 21 of the said judgment is set out
hereinbelow:
"There is no embargo on the appellate court reviewing the evidence upon which an
order of acquittal is based. Generally, the order of acquittal shall not be interfered
with because the presumption of innocence of the accused is further strengthened by
acquittal. The golden thread which runs through the web of administration of justice
in criminal cases is that if two views are possible on the evidence adduced in the case,
one pointing to the guilt of the accused and the other to his innocence, the view which
is favourable to the accused should be adopted. The paramount consideration of the
Court is to ensure that miscarriage of justice is prevented. A miscarriage of justice
which may arise from acquittal of the guilty is no less than from the conviction of an
innocent. In a case where admissible evidence is ignored, a duty is cast upon the
appellate court to reappreciate the evidence in a case where the accused has been
acquitted, for the purpose of ascertaining as to whether any of the accused committed
any offence or not. (See Bhagwan Singh - Vs. - State of M.P.). The principle to be
followed by the appellate court considering the appeal against the judgment of
acquittal is to interfere only when there are compelling and substantial reasons for
doing so. If the impugned judgment is clearly unreasonable and relevant and
convincing materials have been unjustifiably eliminated in the process, it is
compelling reason for interference. These aspects were highlighted by this Court in
Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade - Vs. - State of Maharashtra, Ramesh Babulal Doshi - Vs. State of Gujarat, Jaswant Singh
- Vs. - State of Haryana, Raj Kishore Jha - Vs. - State of Bihar, State of Punjab - Vs. Karnail Singh and State of Punjab - Vs. - Phola Singh."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126200751/

3

The State Of West Bengal vs Ashim Ghosh on 3 July, 2019

Applying the aforesaid test, this Court finds that the evidence on record is such that the offense
against the accused has not been proved. The views that the State would urge, this Court to take on
such evidence, may be a remotely a plausible view but this Court has independently taken a view on
the evidence on record that prosecution has not been able to establish the offence against the
accused.
In any event the trial occurred in 1987 and acquittal occurred in the same year. To reverse the
finding of the Trial Court after 31 years of the acquittal in a case of the nature would even otherwise
be unfair and improper.
In those circumstances, since the second and major limb of the evidence under Section 3 of the Act
of 1966 has not been proved by the prosecution, the accused-respondent was liable to be acquitted
by the Court below.
Although this Court finds that the Trial Court has not exactly addressed itself to the aforesaid issues
in clear terms, this Court however finds that the conclusion reached by the Trial Court is
unimpeachable and hence the accused was rightly acquitted by the Court below albeit for other
reasons.
For the reasons stated above, the appeal must fail and is hereby dismissed.
The accused is hereby set at large and the bail bond shall stand discharged.
Let a copy of this judgment be sent down the Court below for information.
Urgent photostat certified copy of this order, if applied for, be supplied to the parties as early as
possible.
(Rajasekhar Mantha, J.)

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126200751/

4

