for educational use only
Bhagwan Dagadu Patil And Others vs The State Of Maharashtra And ... on 5 December, 2019

Bombay High Court
Bhagwan Dagadu Patil And Others vs The State Of Maharashtra And ... on 5 December, 2019
Bench: Prasanna B. Varale
1

930-PIL-93-2017

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY
BENCH AT AURANGABAD
PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION NO.93 OF 2017

BHAGWAN DAGADU PATIL AND OTHERS

...PETITIONERS

VERSUS
THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA
AND OTHERS

...RESPONDENTS

Mr A.D. Shinde, Advocate for Petitioners
Mr S.G. Sangle, AGP for Respondents Nos. 1 to 6
Mr S.P. Brahme, Advocate holding for
Mr B.K. Patil, Advocate for Respondent Nos. 8
Mrs Chaitali Kutti-Choudhary, Advocate for Respondent Nos. 5 and 7

CORAM : PRASANNA B. VARALE
AND
ANIL S. KILOR, JJ.
DATE :

5th DECEMBER, 2019

PER COURT :

1. Heard Mr Shinde, learned Counsel appearing for the petitioners, Mr Sangle, learned Assistant
Government Pleader for Respondent Nos. 1 to 6, Mr S.P. Brahme, learned Counsel for Respondent
No. 8 and Mrs. Chaitali Kutti- Choudhary, learned Counsel for Respondent Nos. 5 and 7.
2. The present Public interest Litigation was espousing the cause of encroachment over the
Government land. On issuance of notice as well in response to the order dated 2 930-PIL-93-2017
25th September, 2019, afdavit in reply is fled on behalf of respondent Nos. 3 and 4 through Smt.
D.J. Chaure, Sub Divisional Ofcer, Jalgaon.
3. It was grievance of the petitioners that the land Gut No. 307 admeasuring fve hectares 83-R
situated at village Shahapur, Tal. Jamner, Dist. Jalgaon was an open land and was kept reserved as
grazing land (gairan land) with an additional purpose of construction of water reservoir/ Shet Tale.
The second part of the land is utilized as cremation ground. It was also submitted before this Court
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83178504/

1

Bhagwan Dagadu Patil And Others vs The State Of Maharashtra And ... on 5 December, 2019

that the ofce bearers of the Gram Panchayat, Shahapur, Tal. Jamner, Dist. Jalgaon is permitted the
part of land to be utilized by some of their relatives for an illegal construction of the houses. It is also
submitted before this Court that an impression was created as if these houses are being constructed
under the scheme of State Government known as "Gharkul Yojna". The photographs of the said
land, copies of the representations submitted to the authorities are placed on record, annexed to the
petition.
4. In response to the notice and directions of this Court, the afdavit in reply fled through Smt. D.J.
Chaure, 3 930-PIL-93-2017 makes reference to certain important statements and we quote and it
may be useful for our purposes to refer these statements in Para Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 which are as
under :3. I say and submit that the actual spot inspection of land Gut No. 307 situated at
Mauje Shahapur Tah. Jamner Dist. Jalgaon. I have also gone through the various
land record available at the various ofces.
4. I say and submit that, in the spot inspection it has been found that, there are 5 fully
constructed houses and 2 incomplete houses on the disputed land. There is no
residential use of 5 houses and other two non residential uses. It has been submitted
by the Gramsevak of Village - Shahapur that, the house and construction of it is
illegal. The disputed land adjacent to the cremation land and the land is being used as
cattle feeding (Gurcharan land). The land is also having an illegal tin shed but it was
not traced out as who own or who has built it. There is a Khadakai river and tin shed
at the eastern side of the land and towards the west of the land there is a old tannery.
There are two water well of village Panchayat on the bank of river and from the
west-south corner of the land High tension 4 930-PIL-93-2017 electricity lines are
passing through.
5. I say and submits that, on going through the revenue record from 1952 to till today,
of the land Gut No. 307, it is been found that the previously the land was known as
Survey No. 86 and it was reserved in the name ßljdkjh iMhr lkoZtfuddkekdMsÞ and
later on wide mutation entry no. 1447 it was shown to be reserved for
ßxqjpj.khlkBhÞ6. I say and submit that, upon going though the village Panchayat record, I found
that, there was no entry of the Gharkul constructed on at the disputed land. No such
entry is found in register no. 8A. During the enquiry, it has been submitted by ofcer
bearers of the village Panchayat that, on 31/05/2015, they have submitted a proposal
to the Hon'ble District Collector for extension of village limits and permission to add
the disputed land in Gavthan. The village Panchayat shown the copy of resolution as
well as the order of grant of Gharkul granted by the Chief Executive Ofcer of the
Zillha Parishad.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83178504/

2

Bhagwan Dagadu Patil And Others vs The State Of Maharashtra And ... on 5 December, 2019

7. I say and submit that, the village Panchayat fail to show that they have followed the
terms and condition fxed by the Sub Divisional Ofcer during the allotment of the
disputed land to the village Panchayat. Further 5 930-PIL-93-2017 the village
Panchayat also failed to submit any documents about the permission or authorization
from the Hon'ble Collector for using the Land Gut No. 307 for the Gharkul or other
purpose than specifed in revenue records. Copies of spot inspection report, rough
map prepared at spot, checklist of spot inspection, village Panchayat resolution, 7/12
extract of the disputed land since 1952-53 to till date and list of the persons who
encroached the land Gut No. 307 are annexed herewith and marked as Exhibit"R-1"
collectively.
5. The copy of the spot inspection report is also annexed to the afdavit in reply. The copy of spot
inspection report conducted in presence of the Talathi, Gram Sevak, Circle Ofcer, Wakdi, Block
Development Ofcer, Jamner Panchayat Samittee, Tahsildar, Jamner, Sub Divisional Ofcer, Jalgaon
duly signed by them is annexed to the afdavit in reply as Annexure 'R-1'. Then the copy of 7/12
extract is also placed on record. In the panchanama conducted in presence of the above referred
ofcers dated 11.11.2019, the reference was made to fve fully constructed houses and two partially
constructed houses with the name of the persons who claim to be the benefciaries. In the concluding
part of this list of persons 6 930-PIL-93-2017 signed by the Gram Sevak, Shahapur, it is stated that
fve houses are complete, one house is partially complete and one house is an encroachment. The
afdavit-in-reply also refers to panchnama drawn on that very date i.e. 13.11.2019 showing that there
were as many as 46 tin sheds erected and this list refers to the names of those persons under the
signature of Gram Sevak, Shahapur.
6. Mr Brahme, learned Counsel appearing for respondent No. 8 - The Village Gram Panchayat,
Shahapur made a categorical statement before this Court that though the proposal was submitted by
the Gram Panchayat to the Sub Divisional Ofcer for allotment of the land for construction of the
houses under the scheme known as "Indira Awas Yojna", but the proposal was turned down. Thus,
the only inescapable conclusion which can be drawn from perusal of this material along with the
submission of Mr. Brahme, learned Counsel appearing for the Gram Panchayat, is whatever
construction raised in the land Gut No. 307 is an illegal construction. The tin sheds erected on the
land are also illegal. There was no authorization or permission from any of the Government
authorities either to construct house or to erect the tin sheds. On a specifc 7 930-PIL-93-2017 query
made to Mr Brahme, learned Counsel as to whether any public money was utilized for construction
of these houses, Mr. Brahme categorically replied to this Court that these were constructions carried
on by those persons out of their own expenses and no public money was involved in construction. as
the Gram Panchayat has not granted any permission either for construction of houses or for erection
of tin sheds.
7. Once we arrived at a conclusion that this construction and the erection of tin sheds is an illegal
act, the natural corollary would be in the result of permitting the authority to take appropriate steps
so as to demolish this construction. Accordingly, we direct the Collector to seek a report from the
Gram Panchayat, who would be the competent authority to take the exercise of demolition of this
construction by following the provisions of Gram Panchayat Act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83178504/

3

Bhagwan Dagadu Patil And Others vs The State Of Maharashtra And ... on 5 December, 2019

8. The Collector may fx the stipulation of period while seeking the action taken report from the
Gram Panchayat. On receipt of such report submitted to the Collector, the Collector, District Jalgaon
is at liberty to take appropriate 8 930-PIL-93-2017 decision in case an opinion is formed by the
Collector that for the act of encroachment either the ofcers of Gram Panchayat were responsible or
the act of encroachment was carried out in connivance with some local ofcers, then the Collector is
at liberty to take appropriate action against such erring ofcers including recovery of the amount in
case, any amount of public exchequer was utilized for this illegal construction.
9. Though we dispose of the petition, we direct the Collector, Jalgaon to submit his action taken
report to this Court after eight weeks from the date of order of this Court through the ofce of the
Assistant Government Pleader.
10. The Public Interest Litigation is accordingly disposed of.
11. The authenticated copy be issued to Mr Sangle, the learned Assistant Government Pleader.
12. Mr Shinde, learned Counsel appearing for the petitioners was fair enough to submit before this
Court that to show bona fde the petitioner has deposited an amount of Rs. 10,000/- in this Court
and the amount be diverted to 9 930-PIL-93-2017 any social cause. Accordingly, we direct the
Registry of this Court to divert the amount in the accounts of Child Care Centre initiated in the
premises of this Court along with the interest accrued thereon.
[ ANIL S. KILOR ]
JUDGE

[ PRASANNA B. VARALE ]
JUDGE

mta

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83178504/

4