for educational use only
Vinod Kumar Garg vs State (Govt. Of National Capi.T. ... on 27 November, 2019

Supreme Court of India
Vinod Kumar Garg vs State (Govt. Of National Capi.T. ... on 27 November, 2019
Author: Sanjiv Khanna
Bench: Hon'Ble The Justice, Sanjiv Khanna, Surya Kant

REPORTAB
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1781 OF 2009

VINOD KUMAR GARG

..

APPELLANT

VERSUS
STATE (GOVERNMENT OF NATIONAL
CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI)

.. RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

SANJIV KHANNA, J.
The impugned judgment dated 7th January 2009 passed by the High Court of Delhi upholds
conviction of Vinod Kumar Garg (the appellant, for short) under Sections 7 and 13 of the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988 (the Act, for short) imposed by the Special Judge, Delhi vide judgement
dated 27 th March 2002. The appellant has been sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
one and a half years, and fine of Rs. 1,000/- for each offence and in default of payment to undergo
simple Signature Not Verified imprisonment for three months on both counts separately. The
Digitally signed by SANJAY KUMAR Date: 2019.11.27 16:18:33 IST Reason:
sentences have been directed to run concurrently.
2. Challenging the conviction, the learned senior advocate for the appellant submits that there are
major contradictions on material aspects in the testimonies of the complainant Nand Lal (PW-2)
and the panch witness Hemant Kumar (PW-3). Nand Lal (PW-2) in his court testimony recorded on
9th July 1999 had denied to having paid any money to the appellant prior to lodging of the
complaint, but in his complaint (Exhibit PW-2/A) dated 2nd August 1994, Nand Lal (PW-2) had
alleged that he had fifteen days back paid Rs. 500/- to the appellant. Further, Nand Lal (PW-2) in
his examination-in-chief on hand-wash had claimed that it was taken and perhaps polythene bag
was also washed, but in his cross- examination PW-2 had accepted that hand-wash of the appellant
was not taken. Similarly, Hemant Kumar (PW-3) had contradicted the version in his examination
that the pant wash of the accused was taken at the Anti-Corruption Branch, as in his crossexamination Hemant Kumar (PW-3) had accepted the suggestion that the hand-wash and pocket
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6545890/

1

Vinod Kumar Garg vs State (Govt. Of National Capi.T. ... on 27 November, 2019

wash were not taken after the appellant was apprehended. Inspector Rohtash Singh (PW-5) who had
conducted the raid has admitted that he had not taken the hand-wash or the pant wash of the
appellant from which the polythene packet containing the bribe money was allegedly seized.
Further, the testimonies of Nand Lal (PW-2) and Hemant Kumar (PW-3) reveal a major dichotomy
on the amount that the appellant had allegedly demanded as bribe. In his cross- examination Nand
Lal (PW-2) had denied the suggestion that the appellant had asked for Rs. 2,000/- to be paid
separately by Nand Lal (PW-2) and Hemant Kumar (PW-3) as the two were partners, contrary to the
version given by Hemant Kumar (PW-3) who had deposed that the appellant had told them in the
gallery that each of them should pay Rs. 2,000/-. There is a contradiction in the testimony of Nand
Lal (PW-2) and Hemant Kumar (PW-3) as to the place where the allegedly bribe money was asked
and paid to the appellant. As per Nand Lal (PW-2) the bribe was asked and paid in the garment
shop, whereas Hemant Kumar (PW-3) has denied that the payment took place inside the cloth shop.
Drawing our attention to the version of Nand Lal (PW-2), it was submitted that Hemant Kumar
(PW-3) was not an eyewitness or a panch witness to the demand and payment of alleged bribe
money. In view of the irreconcilable versions of the two witnesses, the appellant is entitled to benefit
of doubt. Further, there is no evidence or document to show that Nand Lal (PW-2) was the tenant in
the shed for which the appellant had statedly asked for bribe money to provide the electricity meter.
Anil Ahuja (PW-6), the owner of the shed has not supported the case of the prosecution and had
contradicted the claim made by Nand Lal (PW-2) in his complaint (Exhibit PW-2/A).
3. On the question of demand and payment of bribe for performance of public duty or forbearance to
perform such duty, we would read the testimonies of the complainant Nand Lal (PW-2), panch
witness Hemant Kumar (PW-3), and the Inspector of Anti- Corruption Branch Rohtash Singh
(PW-5) in unison. Nand Lal (PW-2) has deposed having visited the DESU office and his meeting
with Inspector Yadav for installation of electricity meter in the shed for a fan and a light. Nand Lal
(PW-2) after shifting his goods etc. to the shed had again visited the DESU Office and learnt that
Inspector Yadav had been transferred. Nand Lal (PW-2) had met his successor-the appellant, who
had asked him to move an application for providing a meter for the electricity connection. The
appellant had also stated that electricity could be provided without meter for which Nand Lal
(PW-2) was asked to pay bribe of Rs.2,000/-. Thereupon, Nand Lal (PW-2) had expressed his
inability to pay Rs.2,000/- in lumpsum but he could pay the bribe amount in instalments of
Rs.500/- each, which the appellant had agreed and accepted. Thereafter, Nand Lal (PW-2) had
visited the Anti-Corruption Branch and lodged his complaint on 2 nd August 1994 vide Exhibit
PW-2/A that was signed by him at Point A. Both Hemant Kumar (PW-3) and Inspector Rohtash
Singh (PW-5) have in seriatim confirmed the relevant ensuing events. Nand Lal (PW2), Hemant Kumar (PW-3) and Rohtash Singh (PW-5) have affirmed that Nand Lal (PW-2) had
produced five currency notes of Rs.100/- each, the serial numbers of which were duly recorded and
the notes were sprinkled with powder. The three had then along with other members of the raiding
team proceeded to the DESU office but the appellant had asked Nand Lal (PW-2) to come on the
next day, as the work would not be done on 2 nd August 1994. On 3rd August 1994, Nand Lal
(PW-2) had again visited the Anti-Corruption Branch office where Hemant Kumar (PW-3) and
Rohtash Singh (PW-5) were present. The currency notes were again subjected to chemical treatment
and the raiding party had proceeded to the DESU office. Nand Lal (PW-2) and Hemant Kumar
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6545890/

2

Vinod Kumar Garg vs State (Govt. Of National Capi.T. ... on 27 November, 2019

(PW-3) had met the appellant, who had then asked Nand Lal (PW-2) to wait on the appellants
scooter parked outside the office. After some time, the appellant came out of the office. He started
the scooter and they drove for about 50 yards with Nand Lal (PW-2) sitting on the pillion seat. Nand
Lal (PW-2) in his deposition has stated that he had asked the appellant to stop the scooter as the
third person Hemant Kumar (PW-3) was also accompanying them.
4. Thereafter, there is divergence in the version given by Nand Lal (PW-2) on one side and the
version given by Hemant Kumar (PW3) and Rohtash Singh (PW-5). Nand Lal (PW-2) has testified that the appellant after stopping the
scooter went inside a garment shop. He had then asked Nand Lal (PW-2) to come inside. Nand Lal
(PW-2) proceeded inside. The appellant had then demanded money from Nand Lal (PW-2) lao,
paise do. The appellant had procured one polythene bag and Nand Lal (PW-2) was asked to put the
money in the polythene bag and thereafter put the polythene bag in the appellants pocket. Nand Lal
(PW-2) had suggested that he would give money in the presence of the other person, i.e., Hemant
Kumar (PW-3), which suggestion was not accepted by the appellant. Nand Lal (PW-2) is, however,
categoric that he had as directed put the money in the pocket of the pant of the appellant.
Thereafter, Nand Lal (PW-2) went outside and gave signal to the witness Hemant Kumar (PW-3)
who started to move towards him. The appellant came out of the shop. Nand Lal (PW2) also accepts that Hemant Kumar (PW-3) had given signal to the raiding team who reached the
spot and had caught hold of the appellant. From the pant pocket of the appellant, a polythene bag
containing the currency notes was seized. Thus, Nand Lal (PW-2) accepts that bribe was demanded
and paid and that the tainted bribe money was recovered from the appellant by Rohtash Singh
(PW-5) in his presence and in the presence of Hemant Kumar (PW-3).
5. Hemant Kumar (PW-3) has on the other hand unfailingly affirmed that he had joined the raiding
team as panch witness and that Nand Lal (PW-2) had recorded his statement/complaint vide
Exhibit PW-2/A. Hemant Kumar (PW-3) has deposed as to the five currency notes of Rs. 100/- each
given by the complainant to the Anti-Corruption Branch office on which phenolphthalein powder
was coated. Instructions were given. On 2 nd August 1994 at about 10:00 -10:30 a.m., the raiding
team had visited the DESU office but the appellant had asked Nand Lal (PW-2) to come on the next
day. On 3rd August 1994 at 9:30 a.m. Hemant Kumar (PW-3) had visited the Anti-Corruption
Branch office. Nand Lal (PW-2) was present and the entire exercise of powdering the currency notes
etc. was repeated. Hemant Kumar (PW-3) and Nand Lal (PW-2) along with the raiding team had
reached the DESU office at about 10:00 a.m. The appellant took Nand Lal (PW-2) outside the DESU
office and they drove away on the scooter. Hemant Kumar (PW-3) had followed them on foot. The
scooter was driven to a distance of about 50 yards from the DESU office. Thereupon, the appellant
and Nand Lal (PW-2) had proceeded near a cloth shop where Nand Lal (PW-2) had handed over the
tainted money to the appellant after placing it in a polythene bag in his presence. The appellant had
kept the polythene bag with the currency notes in the right-side pant pocket of the appellant. The
raiding party arrived at the spot and recovered the notes from the right-side pocket of the pant of
the appellant. The notes were tallied with the numbers already noted and the same were seized by
Exhibit PW- 2/C. Thereupon, the appellant-accused was taken to the Anti- Corruption Branch.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6545890/

3

Vinod Kumar Garg vs State (Govt. Of National Capi.T. ... on 27 November, 2019

6. The two testimonies of Nand Lal (PW-2) and Hemant Kumar (PW3) on visit by the raiding team to the DESU office on 2 nd August 1994 when the
appellant had asked Nand Lal (PW-2) to come on the next day; that on 3rd August
1994 Nand Lal (PW-2) and Hemant Kumar (PW-3) along with the raiding team had
accordingly again visited the DESU office; that the appellant and Nand Lal (PW-2)
had travelled on the scooter for a short distance; and that Hemant Kumar (PW-3)
had followed them on foot, are affirmed by Inspector Rohtash Singh (PW-5) who has
also identically deposed, albeit he was not the person who had initially interacted
with the appellant at the DESU office.
7. On the succeeding events, Rohtash Singh (PW-5) in his testimony has affirmed the narration of
facts as stated by Hemant Kumar (PW-3). Hemant Kumar (PW-3) gave a signal and accordingly
members of the raiding team had reached the spot and apprehended the appellant. Rohtash Singh
(PW-5) had then disclosed his identity to the appellant and had challenged him that the appellant
had accepted the bribe money from Nand Lal (PW2). Rohtash Singh (PW-5) had offered for his search, but it was refused by the appellant. The
appellant was searched and polythene bag containing five Rs.100/- currency notes was recovered
from the right-side pant pocket of the appellant. The five notes were marked P-3 to P-7 and were
seized vide seizure memo PW-2/C. The numbers on the currency notes were tallied with the pre-raid
report and were found to be the same.
8. Even if we are to accept the version of Nand Lal (PW-2), the appellant had asked for the bribe
money that was paid to the appellant and at best at that time Hemant Kumar (PW-3) was not
physically present inside the shop and was standing outside the shop. Nand Lal (PW-2) in his
examination-in-chief has stated that the appellant had demanded money from him saying Lao paise
do. Thereafter, Rs. 500/- were paid as bribe by Nand Lal (PW-2) to the appellant in a polythene bag
which was put in the appellants pant pocket as was directed by the appellant. The presence of
Hemant Kumar (PW-3) in the immediate vicinity remains unchallenged. In either case, we do not
think that this deviation and incongruity between the depositions by Nand Lal (PW-2) and Hemant
Kumar (PW-3) should result in the acquittal of the appellant. These deviations between the
testimonies of Nand Lal (PW-2) and Hemant Kumar (PW-3) does not mean that the demand and
payment of bribe, the trap and seizure of the bribe paid is not proved. The testimony of Rohtash
Singh (PW-5) bolsters our findings. Rohtash Singh (PW-5) has deposed about the recovery of bribe
money on lines similar to the version of Nand Lal (PW-2) and Hemant Kumar (PW-3). It appears
that Nand Lal (PW-2) had either tried to help the appellant but was unable do so in view of the
documentary evidence in the form of his written complaint Exhibit PW-2/A signed by him at point
A and other documents prepared at the spot with his signature, or because of the time gap had
forgotten some facts. On the first aspect relating to the contemporaneous documents, we would
refer to the cross- examination of Nand Lal (PW-2) by the Additional Public Prosecutor on 14th
September 1999 which reads as under:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6545890/

4

Vinod Kumar Garg vs State (Govt. Of National Capi.T. ... on 27 November, 2019

...I cannot say whether the numbers of the said GC notes were found to be same
which were mentioned in the pre-raid report. It is wrong that I am not intentionally
disclosing this fact. It is correct that seizure memo of GC notes were prepared in my
presence which is Ex.
PW 2/C which bears my signature at point A. It is correct that GC notes Ex. P3 to P7 are the same
which were recovered from the possession of the accused and were seized vide memo Ex. PW 2/C. It
is correct that said polythene bag was got washed in colourless solution of sodium carbonate and
that solution had turned pink and that solution was transferred into two bottles and the bottles were
properly sealed and labeled. Bottles are Ex. P1 and P2 which bears my signatures on each bottle at
point A. Polythene bag wash Ex. P1 and P2 were taken into possession vide seizure memo Ex.PW
2/D which bears my signatures at point A. Polythene bag is Ex. P8 which bears my signature at
point A. Polythene bag Ex. P8 was taken into possession vide memo Ex. PW 2/F which bears my
signature at point A.
9. Turning to the question of washing the polythene bag, the handwash and the pant wash of the appellant, Rohtash Singh (PW-5) has stated that
phenolphthalein powder was applied to the currency notes and after the appellant
was detained the polythene packet was washed and the wash was transferred to the
bottles marked P1 and P2 which were taken into possession vide Exhibit PW-2/D.
The polythene bag was also seized vide Exhibit PW-2/E. Raid memo proceedings
were marked as Exhibit PW-2/G and post-raid proceedings as Exhibit PW-2/K. The
aforesaid exhibits, i.e. P1 and P2 and the papers prepared have been accepted and
proved in evidence by Nand Lal (PW-2) and Hemant Kumar (PW3).
10. Regarding the hand-wash, Nand Lal (PW-2) could not recollect full facts and had stated that as
far as he could remember, the appellant had given his hand-wash and the polythene bag was also
washed. Nand Lal (PW-2) had identified his signature on the bottles containing the wash of the
polythene bag and also the signature on the papers prepared. Hemant Kumar (PW-3) had stated
that the pant wash was not done. We would observe that ex facie the hand wash and the pant wash
were not done as the coated money was put in the polythene bag. Polythene bag was washed and the
wash kept in the bottles as has been deposed by Rohtash Singh (PW-5). Minor discrepancy and
inability of Nand Lal (PW-2) and Hemant Kumar (PW-3) to remember the exact details of whether
or not the handwash or pant wash was done would not justify acquittal of the appellant.
11. The contradictions that have crept in the testimonies of Nand Lal (PW-2) and Hemant Kumar
(PW-3) noticed above and on the question of the total amount demanded or whether Nand Lal (PW2) had earlier paid Rs.500/- are immaterial and inconsequential as it is indisputable that the bribe
was demanded and taken by the appellant on 3rd August 1994 at about 10:30 a.m. The variations as
highlighted lose significance in view of the proven facts on the recovery of bribe money from the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6545890/

5

Vinod Kumar Garg vs State (Govt. Of National Capi.T. ... on 27 November, 2019

pant pocket of the appellant, on which depositions of Nand Lal (PW-2), Hemant Kumar (PW-3) and
Rohtash Singh (PW-5) are identical and not at variance. The money recovered was the currency
notes that were treated and noted in the pre-raid proceedings vide Exhibit PW-2/G. The aspect of
demand and payment of the bribe has been examined and dealt with above. The contradictions as
pointed out to us and noted are insignificant when juxtaposed with the vivid and eloquent narration
of incriminating facts proved and established beyond doubt and debate. It would be sound to be
cognitive of the time gap between the date of occurrence, 3 rd August 1994, and the dates when the
testimony of Nand Lal (PW-2) was recorded, 9th July 1999 and 14th September 1999, and that
Hemant Kumars (PW-3) testimony was recorded on 18th December 2000 and 30th January 2001.
Given the time gap of five to six years, minor contradictions on some details are bound to occur and
are natural. The witnesses are not required to recollect and narrate the entire version with
photographic memory notwithstanding the hiatus and passage of time. Picayune variations do not in
any way negate and contradict the main and core incriminatory evidence of the demand of bribe,
reason why the bribe was demanded and the actual taking of the bribe that was paid, which are the
ingredients of the offence under Sections 7 and 13 of the Act, that as noticed above and hereinafter,
have been proved and established beyond reasonable doubt. Documents prepared
contemporaneously noticed above affirm the primary and ocular evidence. We, therefore, find no
good ground and reason to upset and set aside the findings recorded by the trial court that have
been upheld by the High Court. Relevant in this context would be to refer to the judgment of this
Court in State of U.P. v. Dr. G.K. Ghosh1 wherein it was held that in a case involving an offence of
demanding and accepting illegal gratification, depending on the circumstances of the case, it may be
safe to accept the prosecution version on the basis of the oral evidence of the complainant and the
official witnesses even if the trap witnesses turn hostile or are found not to be independent. When
besides such evidence, there is circumstantial evidence which is consistent with the guilt of the
accused and inconsistent with his innocence, there should be no difficulty in upholding the
conviction.
12. On the question of reason for the demand and payment of the bribe, the complainant Nand Lal
(PW-2) is categoric that he had taken industrial shed in DSIDC area, Welcome Colony, Seelam Pur,
Delhi on hire from one Anil Ahuja. The shed did not have an electricity meter. Anil Ahuja, who had
appeared as PW-6, had denied having given the said shed on rent and was declared hostile. The
testimony of PW-6 is, however, highly doubtful and not trustworthy, for he had failed and avoided
to answer the question from whom he had purchased the shed. The fact that the shed did not have
an electricity connection as deposed to by Nand (1984) 1 SCC 254 Lal (PW-2) has not been
challenged. Nand Lal (PW-2) in his cross-examination had specifically denied the suggestion that he
has not taken the shed on hire/rent. Interestingly, in the cross- examination one of the suggestions
put to Nand Lal (PW-2) was that he had given an application for electricity connection to the
predecessor of the appellant and not to the appellant, thus, suggesting that Nand Lal (PW-2) wanted
installation of an electricity meter for the shed. We would, therefore, reject the contention of the
appellant that Nand Lal (PW-2) had falsely deposed that he had taken the industrial shed on hire
which did not have an electricity connection. The deposition of Nand Lal (PW-2) that he wanted an
electricity connection to be installed in the shed should be accepted.
13. On the said aspect, we would now refer to Section 20 of the Act which reads as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6545890/

6

Vinod Kumar Garg vs State (Govt. Of National Capi.T. ... on 27 November, 2019

20. Presumption where public servant accepts gratification other than legal
remuneration (1) Where, in any trial of an offence punishable under Section 7 or
Section 11 or clause (a) or clause (b) or subsection (1) of Section 13 it is proved that an accused person has accepted or obtained or has agreed
to accept or attempted to obtain for himself, or for any other person, any gratification (other than
legal remuneration) or any valuable thing from any person, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary
is proved, that he accepted or obtained or agreed to accept or attempted to obtain that gratification
or that valuable thing, as the case may be, as a motive or reward such as is mentioned in Section 7
or, as the case may be, without consideration or for a consideration which he knows to be
inadequate. (2) Where in any trial of an offence punishable under Section 12 or under clause (b) of
Section 14, it is proved that any gratification (other than legal remuneration) or any valuable thing
has been given or offered to be given or attempted to be given by an accused person, it shall be
presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that he gave or offered to give or attempted to give that
gratification or that valuable thing, as the case may be, as a motive or reward such as is mentioned
in Section 7, or, as the case may be, without consideration or for a consideration which he knows to
be inadequate.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), the court may decline to draw
the presumption referred to in either of the said sub-sections, if the gratification or thing aforesaid
is, in its opinion, so trivial that no interference of corruption may fairly be drawn. The statutory
presumption under Section 20 of the Act can be confuted by bringing on record some evidence,
either direct or circumstantial, that the money was accepted other than for the motive or the reward
under Section 7 of the Act. The standard required for rebutting the presumption is tested on the
anvil of preponderance of probabilities which is a threshold of a lower degree than proof beyond all
reasonable doubt.
14. In the case at hand, the condition precedent to drawing such a legal presumption that the
accused has demanded and was paid the bribe money has been proved and established by the
incriminating material on record. Thus, the presumption under Section 20 of the Act becomes
applicable for the offence committed by the appellant under Section 7 of the Act. The appellant was
found in possession of the bribe money and no reasonable explanation is forthcoming that may
rebut the presumption. Further, the recovery of the money from the pocket of the appellant has also
been proved without doubt. We, therefore, hold that money was demanded and accepted not as a
legal remuneration but as a motive or reward to provide electricity connection to Nand Lal (PW-2)
for the shed.
15. Pertinent in this regard would be the statement made by the appellant under Section 313 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (the Code, for short) wherein in response to most of the questions,
the appellant had expressed his inability to answer or denied the evidence proved. The appellant had
accepted his arrest but had debunked the case as false and the CFSL report (Exhibit PW-4/A) as
biased and motivated. In response to the last question, the appellant had alleged that Nand Lal
(PW-2) and Hemant Kumar (PW-3) had not supported the prosecution case and that he was
innocent as he had never demanded or accepted any money as bribe.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6545890/

7

Vinod Kumar Garg vs State (Govt. Of National Capi.T. ... on 27 November, 2019

16. We would now turn our attention to the two technical objections taken by the appellant in
respect of the sanction order and the validity of investigation. In the present case, Navin Chawla
(PW-1) had issued and granted sanction for prosecution of the appellant. He had deposed that the
appellant was working as an inspector in DESU and he was the competent officer to remove him. He
had, after carefully examining the allegations contained in the material placed before him, granted
the sanction for prosecution vide order Exhibit PW-1/A. Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the sanction order
Exhibit PW-1/A read:
Whereas it is alleged that Sh. Vinod Kumar Garg while functioning as Inspector,
DESU (now DVB) Office Seelam Pur, Delhi, a public servant in the discharge of this
official duty demanded Rs. 2,000/- as illegal gratification from Sh. Nand Lal S/o Shri
Megh Raj r/o H.N. 341/20, Mangal Sain Building, Bagh Kare Khan, Delhi-110007 in
consideration for installing an electric meter at shop No. A-2 DSIDC Welcome
Colony, Seelam Pur, Delhi, without proper formalities. Sh. Vinod Kumar Garg,
Inspector, DESU (now DVB) office Seelam Pur, Delhi, demanded, accepted and
obtained Rs. 500/- (second instalment) as illegal gratification from the complaint.
xx xx xx Whereas I, Navin Chawla, Chairman, D.V.B., New Delhi being the authority
competent to remove Sh. Vinod Kumar Garg, DVB Office Seelam Pur, Delhi from
office/services after fully and carefully examining the material before me in regard to
the said allegation and circumstances of the case consider the said Inspector, Vinod
Kumar Garg, DVB Office Seelam Put, Delhi be prosecuted in the Court of Law for the
said offence/offences.
17. Relevant portion of Navin Chawlas (PW-1) examination-in-chief and the entire
cross-examination read as under:
After fully and carefully examining the allegation contained in the material placed
before me and the circumstances of the case I granted sanction for prosecution of
Vinod Kumar Garg vide my order Ex.
PW 1/A. This order bears my signature at point A. xx xx xx Cross-Examination I had received a
request for grant of sanction from the Anti-Corruption Branch. I had received along with the report
of the I.O. calendars (sic kalandra) of oral and documentary evidence. It is correct that in this case, I
had not received copies of statements of witnesses recorded u/s. 161 P.C. (sic Cr.P.C) or the seizure
memos regarding the seizure of the bribe money. I had not received any copy of the report of the
C.F.S.L. I had also received a format of the sanction order. I did not verify from the records of DESU
whether the complainant had applied for an electric connection. I did not verify whether the
complaint was a tenant or allottee of D.S.I.D.C. shed. In fact, I had granted the sanction only on the
basis of the report of the IO and calendars (sic kalandra) of oral and documentary evidence
furnished by the Anti-Corruption Branch. Navin Chawla (PW-1) was specifically cross-examined and
questioned whether he had received the copy of the statement of the witnesses recorded under
Section 161 of the Code or the C.F.S.L report. It is obvious that he had not asked for and received
these reports or the statements under Section 161 of the Code. Navin Chawla (PW-1) in his
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6545890/

8

Vinod Kumar Garg vs State (Govt. Of National Capi.T. ... on 27 November, 2019

cross-examination was, however, clear and categoric that he had received the report of the
Investigating Officer along with the kalandra of oral and documentary evidence. The witness it is
apparent may not be familiar with the statements under Section 161 of the Code etc., but he had
certainly examined and considered the relevant material in the form of oral and documentary
evidence that were a part and parcel of the kalandra. We have to read the cross- examination of
Navin Chawla (PW-1) in entirety and not in piecemeal.
18. The appellant has relied upon the judgments of this Court in Mohd. Iqbal Ahmed v. State of
A.P.2 and State of Karnataka v. Ameerjan3 to challenge the sanction order. In Mohd. Iqbal Ahmed
(supra) it was observed that a valid sanction is the one that is granted by the Sanctioning Authority
after being satisfied that a case for sanction is made out constituting the offence. It is important to
be mindful of the observations made by the Court as reproduced below:
3. [] what the Court has to see is whether or not the Sanctioning Authority at the time
of giving sanction was aware of the facts constituting the offence and applied its mind
for the same Similarly, in Ameerjan (supra), it was observed:
10. [] Ordinarily, before passing an order of sanction, the entire records containing
the materials collected against the accused should be placed before (1979) 4 SCC 172
(2007) 11 SCC 273 the sanctioning authority. In the event, the order of sanction does
not indicate application of mind as (sic to) the materials placed before the said
authority before the order of sanction was passed, the same may be produced before
the court to show materials had in fact been produced. Therefore, what the law
requires is the application of mind by the Sanctioning Authority on the material
placed before it to satisfy itself of prima facie case that would constitute the offence.
On the said aspect, the later decision of this Court in State of Maharashtra v. Mahesh
G. Jain4 has referred to several decisions to expound on the following principles of
law governing the validity of sanction:
14.1. It is incumbent on the prosecution to prove that the valid sanction has been
granted by the sanctioning authority after being satisfied that a case for sanction has
been made out.
14.2. The sanction order may expressly show that the sanctioning authority has
perused the material placed before it and, after consideration of the circumstances,
has granted sanction for prosecution.
14.3. The prosecution may prove by adducing the evidence that the material was
placed before the sanctioning authority and its satisfaction was arrived at upon
perusal of the material placed before it.
14.4. Grant of sanction is only an administrative function and the sanctioning
authority is required to prima facie reach the satisfaction that relevant facts would
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6545890/

9

Vinod Kumar Garg vs State (Govt. Of National Capi.T. ... on 27 November, 2019

constitute the offence.
14.5. The adequacy of material placed before the sanctioning authority cannot be
gone into by the court as it does not sit in appeal over the sanction order.
(2013) 8 SCC 119 14.6. If the sanctioning authority has perused all the materials
placed before it and some of them have not been proved that would not vitiate the
order of sanction.
14.7. The order of sanction is a prerequisite as it is intended to provide a safeguard to a public
servant against frivolous and vexatious litigants, but simultaneously an order of sanction should not
be construed in a pedantic manner and there should not be a hypertechnical approach to test its
validity. The contention of the appellant, therefore, fails and is rejected.
19. The last contention of the appellant is predicated on Section 17 of the Act and the fact that the
investigation in the present case was not conducted by the police officer by the rank and status of the
Deputy Superintendent of Police or equal, but by Inspector Rohtash Singh (PW-5) and Inspector
Shobhan Singh (PW-7). The contention has to be rejected for the reason that while this lapse would
be an irregularity and unless the irregularity has resulted in causing prejudice, the conviction will
not be vitiated and bad in law. The appellant has not alleged or even argued that any prejudice was
caused and suffered because the investigation was conducted by the police officer of the rank of
Inspector, namely Rohtash Singh (PW-5) and Shobhan Singh (PW-7).
20. This Court in Ashok Tshering Bhutia v. State of Sikkim5 referring to the earlier precedents has
observed that a defect or irregularity in investigation however serious, would have no direct bearing
on the competence or procedure relating to cognizance or trial. Where the cognizance of the case has
already been taken and the case has proceeded to termination, the invalidity of the precedent
investigation does not vitiate the result, unless a miscarriage of justice has been caused thereby.
Similar is the position with regard to the validity of the sanction. A mere error, omission or
irregularity in sanction is not considered to be fatal unless it has resulted in a failure of justice or has
been occasioned thereby. Section 19(1) of the Act is matter of procedure and does not go to the root
of the jurisdiction and once the cognizance has been taken by the court under the Code, it cannot be
said that an invalid police report is the foundation of jurisdiction of the court to take cognizance and
for that matter the trial.
21. For the foregoing reasons, we dismiss the present appeal and uphold the conviction of the
appellant under Sections 7 and 13 of the Act and the sentences as imposed. The appellant would
surrender within a period of four weeks from today to undergo the remaining sentence. On failure to
surrender, coercive steps would (2011) 4 SCC 402 be taken by the trial court. All pending
applications are also disposed of.
......................................J.
(INDU MALHOTRA) ........................................J.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6545890/

10

Vinod Kumar Garg vs State (Govt. Of National Capi.T. ... on 27 November, 2019

(SANJIV KHANNA) NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 27, 2019

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6545890/

11

