for educational use only
Mohan Maroti Jadhav (In Jail) vs The State Of Maharashtra, Thr. ... on 20 June, 2019

Bombay High Court
Mohan Maroti Jadhav (In Jail) vs The State Of Maharashtra, Thr. ... on 20 June, 2019
Bench: P.N. Deshmukh
Cri.Appeal 362 of
1/11

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY
NAGPUR BENCH, NAGPUR.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.362 OF 2016.
Mohan Maroti Jadhav,
Aged about 38 years, R/o Ambezari,
Tq.Ghatanji, District Yavatmal.

...APPEL

Versus
The State of Maharashtra, through
P.S.O. Ghatanji Police Station.

...RESPONDE

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Shri M.P.Kariya, Advocate for appellant.
Shri S.A.Ashirgade, APP for respondent.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------CORAM : P.N.DESHMUKH &
MRS. PUSHPA V. GANEDIWALA, JJ.

DATE OF RESERVE : 10.06.2019.
DATE OF PRONOUNCEMENT : 20.06.2019.
JUDGMENT : (PER PUSHPA V. GANEDIWALA, J.) The conviction of the appellant-original
accused for the offence punishable under Sections 302 and 397 of the Indian Penal Code, in
Sessions Case No.06/2014, at the instance of Police Station, Ghatanji, District Yavatmal, in Crime
No. 136/2013 dated 18/09/2013, is challenged in this appeal.
2. For the offence of murder, the appellant-accused is sentenced to undergo life imprisonment and
to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/-, in default, further R.I. for one month and for the offence of robbery, he is
sentenced to undergo R.I. for 10 years and to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/-, in default, further R.I. for one
month.
Cri.Appeal 362 of 16.odt
3. The prosecution story, in brief, is as under:-

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54221007/

1

Mohan Maroti Jadhav (In Jail) vs The State Of Maharashtra, Thr. ... on 20 June, 2019

(i) That on 18/09/2013, P.I. Ambadkar of Police Station, Ghatanji received an information about
murder of Zimibai, resident of Ambezhari and missing of silver ornaments from her body. P.I. Shri.
Ambadkar along with P.S.I. Shri. Raut immediately rushed to the spot of the incident. They
prepared spot panchnama and seized articles from the spot. Inquest panchnama of the dead body
was also prepared and the dead body was sent for postmortem to Rural Hospital, Ghatanji.
(ii) On the same day, a crime came to be registered at Police Station, Ghatanji against an unknown
person on the report of son of deceased Zimibai, namely Mohan Jadhav - PW/1. During
investigation, it was transpired that the present appellant is the perpetrator of the said crime and
hence he came to be arrested.
(iii) It is the case of the prosecution that the appellant- accused after committing murder of Zimibai
by strangulation, robbed her ornaments (2 kade, 2 patlya, one chain and 2 bawates) from her body
and hanged her body to one tree in the field with white rope. It is further the case of the prosecution
that the accused sold the booty on the same day to three different goldsmiths in the village Mohada.
Police recorded statements of goldsmiths and seized the impugned ornaments from them. Police
also recorded statements of other witnesses.
(iv) After investigation, the police filed charge-sheet against the appellant- accused before the Court
of Judicial Magistrate First Class, Ghatanji, which in its turn committed the case to the Court of
Sessions, Yavatmal, as the offence of murder, being exclusively Cri.Appeal 362 of 16.odt triable by
the Court of Sessions. The Sessions Court framed charge against the accused and read over the same
to him in his vernacular. It was denied by the accused. The plea of the accused was recorded.
(v) The prosecution examined in all 17 witnesses to establish its case against the accused and also
filed some related documents and seized muddemal on record. The Trial Court recorded statement
of the accused under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. His defence is of total denial.
He was called to enter upon his defence. He denied the same. The learned Trial Court on the basis of
submissions made on behalf of both the parties and the material on record found the accused guilty
of the charge framed against him and pronounced the judgment of conviction. The impugned
judgment is challenged in this appeal.
4. We have heard Shri M.P.Kariya, learned Advocate for appellant and Shri S.A.Ashirgade, learned
APP for respondent/State.
5. The learned counsel for the appellant vehemently submitted that the whole case is dependent on
circumstantial evidence and the chain of circumstances is not complete. There are so many missing
links in the chain. The accused has been involved in this crime on the basis of suspicion. The
suspicion can not take the place of real truth. There was no recovery from the accused, neither of the
ornaments nor of the money received from the alleged sale of the ornaments. The learned counsel
took us through the relevant part of the evidence of the witnesses and submitted that there is
absolutely nothing against the accused to connect him for the charge of murder of Zimibai. The
learned counsel prayed for Cri.Appeal 362 of 16.odt acquittal of the accused.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54221007/

2

Mohan Maroti Jadhav (In Jail) vs The State Of Maharashtra, Thr. ... on 20 June, 2019

6. The learned APP supported the impugned judgment and order and submitted that the accused
with the intention to rob Zimibai, committed her murder by strangulation and hanged the body to
one tree to pretend that Zimibai has committed suicide. The witnesses identified the accused and
the ornaments, which were on the person of deceased Zimibai. The accused was seen following
Zimibai prior to the incident. The learned APP submits that there is sufficient material on record to
establish guilt of the accused. Lastly, it is submitted that the prosecution has proved its story beyond
reasonable doubt.
7. We have considered the submissions advanced on behalf of both the parties. At the outset,
admittedly, there is no eye-witness to the incident. Nothing is recovered from the accused. There is
no "last seen theory" too. None of the witnesses deposed that he has seen accused and Zimibai
together prior to the incident within a reasonable proximity of time. The prosecution examined
three goldsmiths i.e. PW/2 - Ashok, PW/3 - Nilesh and PW/11 - Rajendra to establish that the
accused sold the booty to these witnesses. All these witnesses deposed about selling of ornaments by
the accused to them. However, their oral version is not supported by any document in the form like
receipt or bill etc. There are material omissions in the testimony of these witnesses. Furthermore, as
rightly submitted by the learned defence counsel that there was no specific identification mark on
the ornaments to show that the said ornaments were of deceased-Zimibai and there is nothing on
record that on that day Zimibai had wore those ornaments. Admittedly, Zimibai was of Banjara
community and it has come in the cross Cri.Appeal 362 of 16.odt examination of the witnesses that
women in Banjara community wear such types of silver ornaments which are identical in nature.
8. The homicidal death of Zimibai is not disputed. However, the material on record is not sufficient
to connect the accused to the alleged crime and to draw a conclusion that the accused only and no
other person has committed murder of Zimibai.
9. To make it more clear, the prosecution story, as per the testimony of witnesses, is that in the
morning at about 10.30 a.m., Zimibai went to wash clothes at the site of Nala. PW/15 - Babita had
also come there to wash clothes. Zimibai told her that she has to go towards field site for some time
and asked Babita to look after her bucket of clothes. Zimibai did not return upto 4.p.m.
10. The sons of Zimibai, PW/1 - Mohan and PW/4 - Madhukar were in the house when their mother
left for washing clothes and thereafter they left for Ganpati immersion procession. They came back
at about 4.00 p.m. They found their mother not in the house. At that time, Babita reached the
bucket of clothes to their house and informed that their mother had left for field in the morning and
did not come back. As she saw the bucket of clothes of Zimibai still lying there at the site of Nala, she
brought it to their house.
11. The sons of Zimibai along with villagers started frantic search for Zimibai. At last they found the
body of Zimibai hanging to one tree on the way to their field in a sitting position. Her pair of slippers
was also seen on the pathway near their field. The ornaments were missing from her body.
Immediately, they informed the Police Station, Ghatanji. F.I.R. came to be registered against an
Cri.Appeal 362 of 16.odt unknown person.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54221007/

3

Mohan Maroti Jadhav (In Jail) vs The State Of Maharashtra, Thr. ... on 20 June, 2019

12. At about 8.00 p.m. in the evening, PW/11 - Rajendra informed PW/4 - Madhukar, son of Zimibai
that one person had sold some silver ornaments to his shop. Immediately, he along with police
rushed to his shop. PW/4 - Madhukar identified the ornaments of his mother. PW/11 - Rajendra
gave description about the clothes of the person who sold the said ornaments and also about the
languages he was speaking. On the basis of the description of the accused given by PW/11 Rajendra, villagers,who gathered there informed P.I. Ambadkar - PW/14 that such person is Mohan
Jadhav i.e. the present accused. Accordingly, Mohan Jadhav was brought at Police Station.
Goldsmiths PW/11 - Rajendra and PW/2 - Ashok identified him to have sold silver ornaments to
them. The learned Sessions Judge on the basis of identification of the accused by the goldsmiths and
identification of silver articles by the son of Zimibai drew presumption that accused is the only
person who has committed murder of Zimibai.
13. In our opinion, such a presumption without any base of law is totally erroneous. As stated
earlier, the whole case is dependent on circumstantial evidence. The law as regards circumstantial
evidence is well settled in the catena of judgments and the following principles with regards
circumstantial evidence is still holding the field.
(1) the circumstances from which an inference of guilt is sought to be drawn must be cogently and
firmly established;
(2) those circumstances should be of a definite tendency unerringly pointing towards the guilt of the
accused;
Cri.Appeal 362 of 16.odt (3) the circumstances, taken cumulatively, should form a chain so complete
that there is no escape from the conclusion that within all human probability the crime was
committed by the accused and none else, and (4) the circumstantial evidence in order to sustain
conviction must be complete and incapable of explanation on any other hypothesis than that of the
guilt of the accused and such evidence should not only be consistent with the guilt of the accused but
should be inconsistent with his innocence."
14. In the instant case, nobody had seen the accused with Zimibai. Witnesses claim to have seen
Zimibai going towards the Nala and accused following her. However, as per the deposition of Babita
at about 10.30 a.m., Zimibai left Nala site for going to the field. In such circumstances, there is no
question of Zimibai going towards the Nala site and accused following her.
15. There is absolutely not a single circumstance directly connecting the accused for the death of
Zimibai. Admittedly, PW/11
- Rajendra - the goldsmith is the friend of son of Zimibai. The testimonies of other goldsmiths PW/2
- Ashok and PW/3 - Nilesh are infested with material omissions. All the three goldsmiths in the
similar tone deposed that he was wearing Black Pant and T-Shirt of strips, he was slim, talking in
Banjara and Marathi languages interruptedly. Without maintaining any record all these three
witnesses appears to have purchased silver ornaments worth rupees more than 10,000/-each from
an unknown person. On the basis of their oral evidence without any support and without any other
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54221007/

4

Mohan Maroti Jadhav (In Jail) vs The State Of Maharashtra, Thr. ... on 20 June, 2019

direct proof, the accused can not be convicted for the charge of Cri.Appeal 362 of 16.odt murder on
the basis of presumptions and surmises. Even, he was not found possessing the booty. Nothing was
recovered from him. Even, he can not be termed as thief by applying presumption under section 114
of the Evidence Act. The only guesswork by which the accused came to be arrested as villagers
informed the police that the said unknown person might be accused. This appears to be highly
improbable. No iota of evidence about recovery of money in cash from the accused which the
accused allegedly received after selling those ornaments of Zimibai to the goldsmiths, though the
accused came to be arrested on the same day. So also, there is nothing o record as to what did he do
with the said money.
16. There is one more strong reason not to rely on the prosecution story as the inquest panchnama
shows yellow metal earings on the body of Zimibai. Had there been any intention of the accused to
rob the valuable ornaments, why did he not also rob those earings. The accused came to be
convicted on the basis of the following circumstances brought on record by the prosecution against
the accused.
1. Zimibai was going towards Nala and accused followed her.
2. PW/2 - Ashok, PW/3 - Nilesh and PW/11 - Rajendra purchased silver ornaments on that day from
one unknown person.
3. All these three witnesses identified accused to have sold ornaments of Zimibai.
4. Son of Jhimibai - PW/4 - Madhukar identified silver ornaments of Zimibai in the shop of
goldsmith PW/11 Cri.Appeal 362 of 16.odt Rajendra.
17. None of the above circumstances is in the nature of full- proof to connect the accused for the
death of Zimibai. As per the settled law on circumstantial evidence, each and every circumstance is
of such a nature which would lead conclusively to connect the accused liable for the offence. In this
case, there are so many missing links in the chain as may be demonstrated here under, which in our
opinion, the prosecution ought to have proved.
1. No evidence that Zimibai had wore the alleged ornaments on the day of incident.
2. No reliable evidence that the ornaments which allegedly seized from the goldsmiths were of
Zimibai as there are no specific marks and admittedly, the women in Banjara community wear
ornaments of identical nature.
3. No corroborative evidence that accused sold the ornaments to the goldsmiths except oral
testimonies of the goldsmiths.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54221007/

5

Mohan Maroti Jadhav (In Jail) vs The State Of Maharashtra, Thr. ... on 20 June, 2019

4. No evidence about the compelling circumstances before the accused to commit murder and rob
the silver ornaments.
5. Not a single pie was seized from the accused to show that he was found in possession of cash
received from the sale of ornaments, though the arrest of the accused was on the same day.
6. Even if the cash is not recovered from the accused Cri.Appeal 362 of 16.odt there is no evidence to
show what did the accused do with the said cash allegedly received by him.
7. No evidence as to connect the accused with the cotton strip or white rope by which the body of
Zimibai was strangulated and hanged.
8. No evidence as to how the accused single handedly managed to hang the body of Zimibai to tree
in a sitting position.
9. A pair yellow metal ear rings from the body of Zimibai was not robbed.
10. No one had seen accused with Zimibai within a reasonable time prior to the body of Zimibai was
found.
11. Nothing on record to show that the place of incident was an isolated place, possible to commit
such an act.
18. All of the above circumstances, in our opinion, ought to have been brought on record by the
prosecution to complete the chain of circumstances. It is the cardinal principle of law that the best
evidence should come before the Court. In the instant case, for want of proof of the above
circumstances, the accused cannot be convicted for the charge of robbery and murder. The learned
trial Court did not consider the evidence in its correct perspective. Hence, we find that the
prosecution has failed to prove the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt. Thus, the accused
is entitled to be acquitted.
19. In the circumstances, we pass the following the order:Cri.Appeal 362 of 16.odt ORDER
(i) The appeal is allowed.
(ii) The judgment and order dated 30/11/2015 passed by the learned Sessions Judge,
Yavatmal, in Sessions Case No.06/2014, is hereby quashed and set- aside. The
appellant/accused - Mohan Maroti Jadhav is acquitted of the offence punishable
under Sections 302 and 397 of the Indian Penal Code in Crime No.136/2013 dated
18/09/2013, P. S Ghatanji.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54221007/

6

Mohan Maroti Jadhav (In Jail) vs The State Of Maharashtra, Thr. ... on 20 June, 2019

(iii) The accused is in jail, he shall be released forthwith, if not required in any other
case.
(iv) The Muddemal being useless be destroyed.
(v)
accordingly.

The

JUDGE

criminal

appeal

is

disposed

off

JUDGE

Sumit

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54221007/

7

