for educational use only
Mahendra Dattatraya Deshmukh And ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 28 February, 2019

Bombay High Court
Mahendra Dattatraya Deshmukh And ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 28 February, 2019
Bench: A.S. Oka
SSKN

1/12

871.12-apeal--judgment.doc

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 871 OF 2012
1.
2.
3.
4.

Mahendra Dattatray Deshmukh.
Dashrath Bhau Baderao.
Ajay Pundlik Deshmukh.
Eknath Bhau Baderao.
V/s.
The State of Maharashtra.

...

Appellants.

...

Respondent.

...

Appellants.

...

Respondent.

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 916 OF 2012
1. Kiran @ Bapu Dashrath Baderao.
2. Rohan Dattatraya Deshmukh.
V/s.
The State of Maharashtra.

Ms.Payoshi Roy i/b. Mr.H.S.Deshpande for the appellants in Appeal
No.871/2012.
Ms.Payoshi Roy i/b. Dr.Yug Mohit Chowdhary for the appellants in Appeal
No.916/2012.
Mr.J.P.Yagnik, APP for the respondent- State.
CORAM :

A.S.OKA AND A.S.GADKARI, JJ.

DATE
ORAL JUDGMENT :

:

28th February 2019.

(Per A.S.Gadkari, J.)

In the present appeal, the appellants will be referred as per their original accused Nos. before the
trial Court for the sake of brevity and for preciseness.
SSKN 2/12 871.12-apeal--judgment.doc
2. By the impugned Judgment and Order dated 9 th July 2012 passed by the learned Additional
Sessions Judge, Kalyan in Sessions Case No.284/2008, the accused No.1- Kiran Baderao and
accused No.3- Rohan Deshmukh are convicted under section 302 read with 34 of the Indian Penal
Code (for short "IPC") and sentenced to suffer imprisonment for life and to pay fine of Rs.5,000/Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85708026/

1

Mahendra Dattatraya Deshmukh And ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 28 February, 2019

each, in default of payment of fine, to further suffer simple imprisonment for three months. By the
impugned Judgment and Order, the accused No.2- Mahendra Deshmukh, accused No.4- Dashrath
Baderao, accused No.5- Ajay Deshmukh and accused No.6- Eknath Baderao are convicted for the
offences punishable under section 325 read with section 34 of IPC and section 324 read with 34 of
IPC and are sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for one year on each count and to pay fine of
Rs.1,500/- each, in default of payment of fine, to further suffer simple imprisonment for three
months. The Trial Court has directed that the substantive sentences for the offences punishable
under sections 325 and 324 of IPC to run concurrently. The said judgment and order dated 9th July
2012 is impugned herein.
By the same impugned Judgment and Order, the original accused No.7- Bhushan Choudhari,
accused No.8- Rafik Shaikh and SSKN 3/12 871.12-apeal--judgment.doc accused No.9- Ashok Vishe
have been acquitted from the offences punishable under sections 302, 307, 324 read with section
109 of IPC.
3. Heard Ms.Payoshi Roy, learned counsel for the appellants/ accused and Mr.Yagnik, learned APP
for the State. Perused entire record.
4. The case of the prosecution, in brief, is that, the original accused Nos.7, 8 and 9 and deceased
Yogesh Warghade were Commission Agents in the business of sale and purchase of lands in the
vicinity of Murbad Taluka. There was a dispute between the original accused Nos.7 to 9 and the
deceased Yogesh about apportionment of the commission pertaining to the sale of land and
therefore, at the instance of the original accused Nos.7 to 9, it is alleged that the appellants i.e.
original accused Nos.1 to 6 assaulted deceased- Yogesh on 1 st August 2008 between 3.30 to 4.00
pm in the house of Santosh Yashwantrao at village-Gundegaon, Taluka- Murbad by using swords
and wooden logs and committed his murder. It is the further case of the prosecution that in the said
assault, Harishchandra Warghade (PW2), Mustaq Shaikh (PW3), Sunil Warghade (PW10) also
sustained injuries. After completion of investigation, the Police submitted chargesheet in the Court
of Judicial Magistrate First Class at Shahapur, district- Thane.
SSKN 4/12 871.12-apeal--judgment.doc
5. As the offence punishable under section 302 of IPC is exclusively triable by the Court of Sessions,
the learned Judicial Magistrate committed the said case to the Court of Sessions at Kalyan. After
committal of the case, the Trial Court framed charge below Exhibit-66. The said charge was read
over and explained to the accused persons in a vernacular language to which they denied. The plea
of the accused persons has been recorded by the trial Court below Exhibits-67 to 75. The defence of
accused Nos.1- Kiran Baderao, No.3- Rohan Deshmukh, No.5- Ajay Deshmukh and No.6- Eknath
Baderao was of total denial. Their defence was of false implication in the present crime. It was their
further defence that it is the villagers of Gundegaon who assaulted the deceased Yogesh and other
witnesses on account of assault by the injured witnesses to some of the villagers and that the present
accused have nothing to do with the present crime.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85708026/

2

Mahendra Dattatraya Deshmukh And ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 28 February, 2019

6. A perusal of the entire evidence available on record would indicate that Mustaq Shaikh (PW3) is
an independent injured eye witness. Mustaq Shaikh in his testimony has stated that the incident
took place on 1st August 2008 between 3 to 4 pm in the eastern direction of the house of Santosh
Yashwantrao. On that day, he had been to village Dolkhamb. He received a call from deceased
Yogesh stating that they SSKN 5/12 871.12-apeal--judgment.doc have to go to the house of Santosh
for taking meal. Therefore, he went to the house of Santosh. He has further stated that he, Santosh
Yashwantrao, deceased- Yogesh and Sunil Warghade took meals at the house of Santosh. That
accused No.1- Kiran Baderao made enquiry with deceased- Yogesh as to whether Santosh was in the
house or not. Yogesh (deceased) told him that Santosh was not in the house. The accused No.1Kiran got angry on account of their previous dispute and slapped Yogesh (deceased). The accused
No.1- Kiran also abused deceased- Yogesh. Sunil (PW10), Santosh Yashwantrao and Ramesh
Warghade (PW1) were in the house at that time. They heard shouts of Harishchandra Warghade
(PW2) who is the brother of deceased- Yogesh, from the backside of the house of Santosh.
Therefore, they all went to the backside of house of Santosh Yashwantrao. He has further stated that
accused No.1- Kiran Baderao and accused No.3- Rohan Deshmukh were having swords in their
hands. That accused No.6- Eknath Baderao, accused No.5- Ajay Deshmukh and accused No.4Dashrath Baderao also came there. Accused No.1- Kiran Baderao gave blow of sword on deceased
Yogesh. The accused No.3- Rohan Deshmukh also gave another blow of sword on deceased Yogesh.
It is alleged that accused No.2- Mahendra was also having sword and he gave a blow with it on the
hand SSKN 6/12 871.12-apeal--judgment.doc of Harishchandra Warghade (PW2). He has further
stated that he as well as Sunil M. Warghade (PW10) were also assaulted by wooden rods by accused
No.4- Dashrath Baderao, accused No.5- Ajay Deshmukh and accused No.6- Eknath Baderao. That,
he and Sunil M. Warghade (PW10) and Ramesh Warghade (PW1) ran away on motorbike to their
village. He has stated that deceased- Yogesh was assaulted by accused No.1- Kiran Baderao as
Yogesh spoke lie about the presence of Santosh Yashwantrao in his own house.
The said witness was cross-examined at length by the defence. In his cross-examination, he has
admitted that on the date and time of incident he along with Ramesh Warghade (PW1),
Harishchandra Warghade (PW2), deceased-Yogesh, Vishnu Thakare, Santosh Yashwantrao and one
Mhalase had gathered at the house of Vishnu Thakare as it was no Moon night (Gatari Amavasya).
They came to the house of Santosh Yashwantrao after the party at Vishnu Thakare's house was over
at about 2.00 pm. He has admitted that, the accused No.5- Ajay Deshmukh was assaulted by some
of the persons from their group at about 2.15 pm. He has further admitted that some of the other
accused persons were also assaulted on that day at about 3.00 pm. That the villagers of Gundegaon
intervened and rescued them. Thereafter he SSKN 7/12 871.12-apeal--judgment.doc along with
other witnesses went in the house of Santosh Yashwantrao and sat there. He has further admitted
that Ramchandra Choudhary and his son Rajesh came there. At that time, the deceased- Yogesh
abused Ramchandra Choudhary and thereafter the villagers started to gather there. He has admitted
that a mob of about 100 persons had gathered at that time. He has further admitted that the said
mob came towards the house of Santosh Yashwantrao at 4.00 pm. by giving abuses and started to
assault them including deceased- Yogesh when they came out of the house of Santosh Yashwantrao.
Therefore, all the witnesses started to run at different directions. It was about 4.00 pm. when the
said assault took place. He has admitted that, therefore, they were not in a position to see who were
assaulting deceased- Yogesh.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85708026/

3

Mahendra Dattatraya Deshmukh And ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 28 February, 2019

6. Ramesh Warghade (PW1), Harishchandra Warghade (PW2) and Sunil M. Warghade (PW10) have
narrated a different version and have stated that when the said witnesses were taking meals at the
house of Santosh Yashwantrao at 3.00 pm, the accused No.1- Kiran Baderao came there and asked
whether Santosh is there or not. At that time, deceased- Yogesh told him that, Santosh is not in the
house. However, accused No.1- Kiran Baderao saw Santosh in the house and, therefore, he abused
Yogesh in a filthy language and questioned Yogesh as to why he SSKN 8/12
871.12-apeal--judgment.doc spoke lie though Santosh was in house. Accused No.1- Kiran Baderao,
therefore, asked Santosh Yashwantrao to come out of house and, therefore, all the witnesses came
out of the house. The said witness saw all the accused Nos.1 to 6 standing outside the house. That,
accused No.1- Kiran Baderao, accused No.2- Mahendra Deshmukh, accused No.3- Rohan
Deshmukh were holding swords and accused No.4- Dashrath Baderao, accused No.5- Ajay
Deshmukh and accused No.6 Eknath Baderao were holding wooden rods in their hands. Accused
No.1- Kiran gave a blow of sword on the neck of Yogesh from the backside and the others rushed
towards Ramesh Warghade (PW1) and Mustaq Shaikh (PW3). Thereafter Ramesh Warghade (PW1)
and Sunil M. Warghade (PW10) returned to village Welu on motorcycle. They have stated that the
incident of assault on Yogesh took place on account of land transactions.
7. It is to be noted here that Harishchandra Warghade (PW2) in his testimony has stated that the
accused No.2- Mahendra Deshmukh gave a blow of sword on his right hand and, therefore, he
became unconscious. He was not aware as to who took him to the Government Hospital. He
regained consciousness on 3rd August 2008 and the Police thereafter recorded his statement on 4 th
August 2008 in Janjira Hospital. Dr.Vinay Devlalkar (PW7), in his testimony, has contradicted the
testimony of SSKN 9/12 871.12-apeal--judgment.doc Harishchandra Warghade (PW2) and has
stated that Harishchandra (PW2) was brought by 4 to 5 persons in a vehicle on 1 st August 2008 at
about 6.40 pm to the hospital and Harishchandra himself gave history of assault on him by two to
four persons. Thus, the version of Harishchandra (PW2) that he got unconscious after receiving
blow of sword and regained consciousness on 3rd August 2008 appears to be not a true version in
his testimony. It appears that the said witness is not telling truth and, therefore, the said witness is
not a reliable witness.
8. As far as testimony of Sunil M. Warghade (PW10) is concerned, the same is consistent with the
prosecution case but it is contrary to the version narrated by Mustaq Shaikh (PW3). It is to be noted
here that Ramesh Warghade (PW1), Harishchandra Warghade (PW2) and Sunil M. Warghade
(PW10) are close relatives of deceased- Yogesh. It is Mustaq Shaikh (PW3) who is an independent
eye witness though he was close friend of deceased- Yogesh. As noted earlier, in the
cross-examination of Mustaq Shaikh, vital admissions have been brought on record by the defence
which, in our view, really go to the root of the matter. His version is that mob of hundred persons
started assaulting them including the deceased. Therefore, he started running away. Mustaq Shaikh
(PW3) has fairly admitted that he did not see the actual SSKN 10/12 871.12-apeal--judgment.doc
assault and he along with other eye witnesses ran away from the scene of offence immediately after
the assault started.
9. At this stage, it is important to note that though the entire incident has taken place in or near
about house of Santosh Yashwantrao, he has not been examined by the prosecution. Manohar Patil
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85708026/

4

Mahendra Dattatraya Deshmukh And ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 28 February, 2019

(PW11) the investigating officer, in his cross-examination, has admitted that, he had recorded
statement of Santosh Yashwantrao and had also requested the learned Magistrate to record his
statement under section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. That, accordingly, the learned
Magistrate had recorded the statement of Santosh Yashwantrao and witness Vishnu Thakare.
According to us, Santosh Yashwantrao was a star witness in the present case in whose house or in
the precincts of his house the entire incident took place. According to the prosecution case, he is the
said person to whom Yogesh (deceased) tried to shield by telling lie for which accused No.1- Kiran
got angry and assaulted Yogesh. Non- examination of such important witness, namely, Santosh
Yashwantrao by the prosecution creates a serious doubt in the mind of this Court about the veracity
of the statements of other eye witnesses, namely, Ramesh Warghade (PW1), Harishchandra
Warghade (PW2) and Sunil Murlidhar Warghade (PW10) though the said witnesses are injured eye
witnesses.
SSKN 11/12 871.12-apeal--judgment.doc This observation is made in reference to the testimony of
Mustaq Shaikh (PW3) who has deposed a totally different version than the other three eye witnesses
who are undoubtedly close relatives of the deceased- Yogesh.
There are two different versions available on record. It is the well settled principle of law that a
version or circumstance which is beneficial or favourable to the accused needs to be taken into
consideration by the Court while appreciating evidence on record. As noted earlier, Mustaq Shaikh
(PW3) is an independent eye witness. His version inspires confidence in the minds of this Court.
This witness is wholly reliable and trustworthy.
10. In view of the aforesaid deliberation, we are of the considered view that the appellants are
entitled for the benefit of doubt and are, accordingly, given the same.
Hence, the following order:
ORDER
(i) The conviction and sentence of the appellants imposed under the impugned judgment and order
dated 9 th July 2012 passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Kalyan in Sessions Case
No.284/2008 is hereby quashed and set aside and the SSKN 12/12 871.12-apeal--judgment.doc
appellants are acquitted from the charges framed against them by giving benefit of doubt;
(ii) Fine amount, if any, deposited by the appellants be refunded to them after production of an
authenticated copy of this order;
(iii) The appellants shall be forthwith set at liberty provided they are not required in connection with
any other offence;
(iv) The appeals are allowed in the aforesaid terms;
(v) All concerned to act on an authenticated copy of the operative part of the order.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85708026/

5

Mahendra Dattatraya Deshmukh And ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 28 February, 2019

(A.S.GADKARI, J.)

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85708026/

(A.S.OKA, J.)

6

