for educational use only
Ranjan Karmakar vs The State Of West Bengal on 3 September, 2019

Calcutta High Court (Appellete Side)
Ranjan Karmakar vs The State Of West Bengal on 3 September, 2019
In The High Court At Calcutta Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction Appellate Side CRA 81 of 2009
Ranjan Karmakar
-Vs.The State of West Bengal Before : The Hon'ble The Chief Justice Thottathil B.
Radhakrishnan
&
The Hon'ble Justice Arijit Banerjee
For the appellant

: Mr. Souvik Mitter, Adv.
Mr. Avishek Sinha, Adv.

For the State

: Mr. Saswata Gopal Mukherjee, Ld. P.P.,
Ms. Kakali Chatterjee, Adv.

Heard On

: 14.08.2019, 07.08.2019

CAV on

: 14.08.2019

Judgment On

: 03.09.2019

Arijit Banerjee, J.:(1)
This is an appeal against the judgment and order dated 11 July,

2008 passed by the Additional Sessions Judge, 2nd Court, Hooghly in ST No. 11(6)03/SC No.
63/99. The case was initiated against three accused persons namely, Black Cow @ Ranjan
Karmakar, the present appellant, Ashim Majumdar and Upen Sarkar. They were charged with
offences allegedly, committed u/s. 302 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and
under Sections 25/27 of the Arms Act. The learned Trial Judge found the appellant guilty of the
charge punishable under Section 302 IPC. The other two accused persons were found not guilty of
the charges brought against them and were acquitted. (2) The victim was one Birendra Nath Ghosh
@ Biltey. The written complaint was filed by the brother of Biltey, viz. Abhoy Ghosh. The
prosecution case on the basis of such written complaint is that Biltey and his friend Ram Krishna
Giri were travelling on a scooter from Kaylaghat (near Jhautala Kalibari, Shibpur) towards Tribeni.
Biltey was driving the scooter and Ram Krishna was riding pillion. When they were on Shibpur Main
Road one person amongst 10/11 youths called Biltey by his name. Biltey stopped the scooter and got
down from it. The appellant and the other two accused persons namely, Ashim and Upen started
talking to Biltey. At that time, the appellant opened fire at Biltey who fell down on the road in
bleeding condition. The three accused persons and 7/8 other youths fled by a motor operated boat
(Bhutbhuti) towards Kalyani. Biltey was taken to Chinsurah Hospital immediately where he was
declared 'brought dead' by the doctor who attended to Biltey in the emergency department. (3) The
prosecution examined nineteen (19) witnesses, out of whom PW5, PW6, and PW13 are
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8596893/

1

Ranjan Karmakar vs The State Of West Bengal on 3 September, 2019

eye-witnesses. We have perused the entire evidence on record and we are of the considered view
that the decision in this case would turn on evaluation/assessment of the evidence of the said three
eye-witnesses.
(4) PW5, Krishna Das deposed that he owns a Darma Shop at Kaylaghat which is also known as
Jhautala Kalibari. At the time of occurrence of the incident he was working in that shop. He saw
Biltey and another person whom he did not know proceeding on a scooter. Then the appellant called
Biltey and caused him to stop. Then the appellant told Biltey that he would fire at him. At this, Biltey
said 'Ja Ja' which would mean 'I dare you to do whatever you can'. At that point of time, the
appellant fired at Biltey. With the bullet wound Biltey started running away but fell on the ground
after 35 to 40 feet. Later he heard that Biltey expired on the way to the hospital. (5) PW6, a
neighbour of Biltey deposed that he was riding a bicycle at the place of occurrence. He noticed that
the appellant stopped Biltey who was riding a motorcycle. Suddenly, the appellant took out his
weapon from the waist and fired at Biltey who fell down. Biltey's brother, Abhoy Ghosh was
informed. He came and took Biltey on his lap. He shifted Biltey to the hospital and PW6 and others
also followed him.
(6) PW13, Ram Krishna Giri was the friend of Biltey who was riding pillion on the scooter at the
time when the incident occurred. He deposed that on the date of the incident i.e. 9 March, 1996 at
about 4.45 P.M. he and Biltey were travelling towards Tribeni on Biltey's scooter. When they
reached Kaylaghat, the appellant called Biltey. Biltey stopped the scooter and leaving the same in the
possession of PW13, he walked towards the appellant to talk to him. Then the appellant brought out
a pistol and opened fire on Biltey. On hearing the sound of firing, PW6 along with a few others
started moving towards the appellant who warned them not to proceed as otherwise he would open
fire on them. Since they were bare handed, out of fear, they did not proceed further. The appellant
then fled along with 3/4 other persons by a bhutbhuti. PW13 further stated that the appellant "had
some anti-social activities" which was not liked by Biltey and for that reason "they had some hot
discussion and thus a trouble was created in between them". In cross-examination PW13 stated that
there was a time gap of about 3 to 5 minutes between the stoppage of the scooter by Biltey and he
being fired at by the appellant. It also comes out from the evidence of PW13 that there was some sort
of conversation between the appellant and Biltey. (7) The appellant has been convicted of having
murdered Biltey. He has been handed down a punishment of imprisonment for life under Section
302 IPC.
(8) Section 299 IPC defines culpable homicide.
"299. Culpable homicide.--Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention
of causing death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to
cause death, or with the knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death,
commits the offence of culpable homicide."
(9) Section 300 IPC provides that except in the cases mentioned in the exceptions to that Section,
culpable homicide is murder if:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8596893/

2

Ranjan Karmakar vs The State Of West Bengal on 3 September, 2019

i. The act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death; or
ii. It is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender knows to
be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused; or iii. It is
done with the intention of causing bodily injury to any person and the bodily injury
intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death;
or iv. The person committing the act knows that it is so imminently dangerous that it
must, in all probability, cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death,
and commits such act without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or
such injury as aforesaid.
(10) Exception 1 to Section 300 IPC provides that culpable homicide is not murder if the offender
was deprived of the power of self-control by grave and sudden provocation causing the death of the
person who gave the provocation or causes the death of any other person by mistake or accident.
The said exception is subject to two provisos which are not presently germane for us. However, the
Explanation to the said Exception states that whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough
to prevent the offence from amounting to murder is a question of fact. The other Exception which is
relevant for us is Exception 4 which provides that culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed
without premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel and without
the offender having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner. The Explanation
to this Exception says that it is immaterial in such cases which party offers the provocation or
commits the first assault. (11) We have heard learned counsel for the appellant as also learned
counsel for the State.
(12) Learned counsel for the appellant emphatically submitted that the intention on the part of the
appellant to murder Biltey was lacking. It was not a premeditated act on the part of the appellant.
The firing took place in the heat of the moment pursuant to a verbal altercation between the
appellant and the victim. He also submitted that the victim provoked the appellant by saying in a
demeaning manner that the appellant could do whatever he wanted to and the victim did not care.
The appellant's learned counsel also relied on Exception 4 to Section 300 which we have adverted to
above.
(13) Learned counsel for the State, however, urged that the appellant committed the act of firing
knowing that it was imminently dangerous and in all probability would cause death or such bodily
injury as is likely to cause death and fired at Biltey without any excuse for incurring the risk of
causing death or such injury as is likely to cause death. Hence, the appellant's act amounted to
murder under the fourth limb of Section 300 IPC.
(14) We have carefully considered the rival contentions of the parties. (15) The first three limbs of
Section 300 clearly contemplate intention on the part of the accused to cause death of the victim. On
an analysis and assessment of the evidence on record we are of the view that it cannot be said
beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant had such intention. On a preponderance of probabilities
on the basis of the evidence on record the possibility of the appellant being provoked by the victim
cannot be ruled out. It appears from the evidence of PW13 that there was a verbal exchange between
the appellant and the victim for about 3 to 5 minutes after the victim alighted from the scooter and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8596893/

3

Ranjan Karmakar vs The State Of West Bengal on 3 September, 2019

went to the appellant. Only thereafter the appellant shot the victim. What the contents of the
conversation between the appellants and the victim were could not be said by any of the three
witnesses. That is why we say that provocation for committing the offending act in the heat of the
moment cannot be ruled out. Had the appellant stopped the victim's scooter with the intent of
killing him, he could have done so at once without entering into a dialogue with the victim. In the
facts of the case we are not inclined to come to the conclusion that there was a premeditated plan on
the part of the appellant to kill the victim. Only one gunshot was fired on the victim. If the avowed
intent of the appellant was to kill the victim, he would have, going by the normal human conduct,
fired more than once at the victim. The appellant did not do so. The victim ran 35 to 40 feet before
collapsing. The appellant had ample opportunity of finishing him off by firing more than one shot. It
does not appear to us that it was a pre-planned act on the part of the appellant to shoot the victim
with the intent of killing him. We are inclined to give the appellant the benefit of doubt of the
mitigating factor of provocation or the incident having taken place in the heat of the moment.
(16) By no means we are condoning the act of the appellant of firing at the victim. It was definitely
an irresponsible and rash act on his part. Even if it was done under provocation or in the heat of the
moment, such an act is not acceptable and is culpable and deprecable. We strongly deprecate such
an act on the part of the appellant. However, as we have noted above, we do not find the intent to
kill on the part of the appellant in the facts and circumstances of the case and on an appreciation of
the evidence on record. (17) Further, when a person has a plan to kill someone, it is normal human
conduct that he would execute such plan inasmuch as surreptitious, secretive and clandestine a
manner as is possible so as to eliminate the possibility of having an eye-witness to such an act. A
person who nurtures the intention to kill somebody, would normally not give effect to such intention
in broad daylight in front of more than one eye-witnesses which would enhance the chances of his
prosecution, inculpation and conviction. This is also another reason which persuades us to take the
view that the prosecution has not been able to make out the case of their being intention on the part
of the appellant to cause death of the victim which would attract conviction under Section 302 IPC.
(18) We are not inclined to accept the argument put forth by learned counsel for the State that the
offending act on the part of the appellant amounts to murder under the fourth limb of Section 300
IPC. When a person opens fire on another person in the heat of the moment, it is highly unlikely
that the consequence of such an act plays in his mind. In such a situation, the offender would not
normally weigh the pros and cons or the consequences of the act of shooting and then commit the
act. It would ordinarily be an impulsive act done in a fit of rage which would momentarily eclipse
the normal logical thought process of the offender.
(19) In view of the aforesaid, we are of the considered opinion that a case of murder has not been
made out by the prosecution and to that extent we are not in agreement with the learned Trial
Judge. The essential ingredient of intent to kill, has not been established. However, all the
ingredients of an offence punishable under Section 304 IPC are present in the facts of the case.
Accordingly, we deem it fit and proper to alter the charge against the appellant to one under Section
304 IPC i.e. culpable homicide not amounting to murder and reduce the sentence of the appellant to
10 years of rigorous imprisonment. We, however, uphold the sentence passed by the learned Trial
Judge imposing fine of Rs. 5000 on the appellant and in default to suffer rigorous imprisonment for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8596893/

4

Ranjan Karmakar vs The State Of West Bengal on 3 September, 2019

further six months for the offence under Section 304 IPC.
(20) In the result the appeal is allowed in part altering the conviction and reducing the sentence of
the appellant to ten years of rigorous imprisonment with fine of Rs. 5000/- and in default to suffer
rigorous imprisonment for further period of six months. If the appellant has already undergone
sentence as indicated by us, he will be released forthwith if he is not required to be in custody in
connection with any other case.
(21) The appeal is accordingly disposed of.
(22) Urgent certified photocopy of this judgment and order, if applied for, be given to the parties
upon compliance of necessary formalities.
I agree.
(Thottathil B. Radhakrishnan, CJ.)

(Arijit

Banerjee, J.)

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8596893/

5

