for educational use only
State vs Vijay Wamanpatil & Ors. Vs Vijay ... on 14 March, 2019

Bombay High Court
State vs Vijay Wamanpatil & Ors. Vs Vijay ... on 14 March, 2019
Bench: N. J. Jamadar
1

CRI.APPEAL-294-1996.J.doc

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 294 OF 1996
The State of Maharashtra
Vs.
1. Vijay Waman Patil
2. Waman Jeevan Patil
3. Mrs. Pramila Waman Patil
All.R/o. Uma, Flat No.3,
Kashinath Dhuri Road,
Dadar, Mumbai No. 28
to 3)

.. Appellant
]
]
]
]
]
]

.. Respondents
(Original Accused Nos.1

Mr.P.H. Gaikwad, APP for appellant-State.
Mr.B.G. Tangsali, Advocate for respondents.
CORAM
: N. J. JAMADAR, J.
RESERVED ON : 28TH DFEBRUARY, 2019
PRONOUNCED ON : 14TH MARCH 2019
JUDGMENT :

1. This appeal is directed against a judgment and order dated 22 nd December 1995, passed by the
learned Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate (ACMM), 5th Court, Dadar, Mumbai in CC
No.151/P/1985 whereby the learned ACMM acquitted the accused-respondents of the offences
punishable under Sections 452, 454, 457, 427, 341 and 380 read with Section 114 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860.
2. The background facts, in a nutshell, are as under :Waman Patil, the Accused No.2, was a tenant of two rooms in the Chawl known as 'Uma Bhavan'
owned by the father of Suresh Kawali (PWShraddha Talekar PS

1/9

2

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/69338809/

CRI.APPEAL-294-1996.J.doc

1

State vs Vijay Wamanpatil & Ors. Vs Vijay ... on 14 March, 2019

2). The said chawl was demolished and a new building came to be constructed thereon. Certain
disputes arose between the landlord and the tenants leading to the proceedings before the Court of
Small Causes, Mumbai. It is the case of the prosecution that the accused were allotted a part of Flat
No.4 in the reconstructed building. Whereas Flat No.6 was allotted by the landlord to one Smt.
Mrunalini Naik (the first informant).
3. The gravamen of indictment against the accused was that in between 19th April 1984 to 29th April
1984, the accused committed housebreaking by night by breaking open the lock of Flat No.6,
committed theft of the articles of the first informant, namely, photo-frames, iron table and cot, and
on 29th April 1984, when the first informant attempted to enter the said room, the accused
wrongfully restrained her. The first informant, thus, approached Dadar Police Station and lodged
report against the accused on 29th April 1984 at about 9:00 pm. The Investigating Officer,
Balasaheb Jadhav (PW-5) visited the scene of occurrence and drew Panchanama (PW11). The accused came to be arrested. The statements of witnesses were recorded. After finding the
complicity of the accused, the charge-sheet came to be lodged against the accused for the aforesaid
offences.
4. During the course of trial, the learned ACMM, recorded evidence of in all five witnesses including
Suresh Narayan Kawali (PW-2), the son of Shraddha Talekar PS 2/9 3 CRI.APPEAL-294-1996.J.doc
the landlord and Balasaheb Jadhav (PW-5), the I.O.. The accused did not lead any evidence in their
defence which consisted of denial and false implication. After appraisal of the evidence and material
on record, the learned ACMM was persuaded to acquit the accused. Being aggrieved, the State has
preferred this appeal.
5. I have heard Shri P.S.Gaikwad, the learned APP for the appellant and Shri B.G. Tangsali, the
learned counsel for the respondents-accused. The learned APP urged that the learned ACMM
committed an error in returning the finding of not guilty. It was urged that there was adequate
evidence and convincing material to record a finding that the accused Nos.1 to 3 had barged into the
flat No.6, then in possession of the first informant, committed theft of her articles, and also
wrongfully restrained her from entering into the said premises. Reliance was sought to be placed on
the testimony of Sunil Kawali (PW-2), the son of the landlord.
6. In opposition to this, the learned counsel for the respondents submitted that there is not an iota
of evidence to establish the guilt of the accused. In fact, according to the learned counsel for the
respondents, the very factum of the first informant's possession over the Flat No.6 has not been
established and, therefore, the allegation of the house trespass does not hold any ground.
Shraddha Talekar PS

3/9

4

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/69338809/

CRI.APPEAL-294-1996.J

2

State vs Vijay Wamanpatil & Ors. Vs Vijay ... on 14 March, 2019

7. It is pertinent to note that the first informant could not be examined as she died on 6th June 1991.
Nor the landlord could be examined. The prosecution banked upon the evidence of Shri Suresh
Kawali (PW-2) and the document brought on record during the course of his evidence.
8. In this context, firstly the learned ACMM found that there was a finding of the Court of Small
Causes to the effect that Smt. Mrunalini Naik was not in possession of the premises. Secondly, the
learned ACMM also found that the consent terms (Exh.P-3), which were placed on record to show
that the Accused no.2 was given only a part of Flat No.4, were unworthy of reliance as there was
over-writing and interpolation therein and the same was not proved by leading cogent evidence.
Thirdly, the learned ACMM was not prepared to place reliance upon the testimony of Suresh Kawali
(PW-2), as from his own assertions, it became evident that his statement was not recorded on 29 th
April 1984, though he was very much present with the first informant when she lodged the report.
9. The aforesaid approach of the learned ACMM appears to be justifiable. The learned ACMM has
extracted the observations of the learned Judge of the Court of Small Causes, in the order on an
application between the parties before the said Court, in paragraph 8, which reads as under :"8 It is also observed by the Ld. Judge of Small Causes Shraddha Talekar PS 4/9 5
CRI.APPEAL-294-1996.J.doc Court that :
"According to defendant No.1 Mrunalini Naik is put in possession, I fail to
understand as to why the affidavit of said Mrunalini G. Naik has not been filed before
the Court. Not only this, but any counter-foil of rent receipt or any other document
showing possession of Mrunalini Naik is not produced on record. The defendant No.1
is saying on oath that Mrunalini G. Naik is in possession, the plaintiff is also saying
on oath that premises are locked. When the best evidence was available to defendant
No.1 to be produced before the court and it is not produced, an adverse inference is to
be drawn that Mrunalini Naik is not put in possession.
Before parting with the order, I may observe that if Mrunalini G. Naik is found in
possession, the plaintiff is at liberty to add said Mrunalini G. Naik as a party and pray
injunction against her also."
10. The learned ACMM was of the view that the aforesaid observations make it abundantly clear that
the first informant was not prima-facie found to be in possession of the premises in question. The
learned ACMM was also of the view that those observations in a civil proceedings bind the Criminal
Court. Without delving into the binding efficacy of the judgment of the Civil Court upon the
Criminal Court, in the facts of the case, it becomes explicitly clear that in the face of aforesaid
observations of the learned Judge, Court of Small Causes, no material was placed on record to
establish the factum of possession of Smt. Mrunalini Naik. It is pertinent to note that the learned
Judge, Court of Small Causes, had expressly negatived the claim of the landlord that the first
informant Smt. Mrunalini Shraddha Talekar PS 5/9 6 CRI.APPEAL-294-1996.J.doc Naik was in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/69338809/

3

State vs Vijay Wamanpatil & Ors. Vs Vijay ... on 14 March, 2019

possession of the premises in question for the reason that the landlord had neither tendered any
document in the nature of counter-foil of rent receipt to substantiate the claim of inducting Smt.
Mrunalini Naik into the premises in question nor the affidavit of the said Mrunalini Naik was filed
in support of the said claim.
11. Before the learned ACMM, the prosecution sought to prove the factum of possession of the first
informant by tendering a photostate copy of a certificate (Exh.P-5) which proclaimed that the first
informant was inducted into Flat No.6. The learned ACMM rightly discarded the said document for
the reason that its original was not tendered and that the identity of its author could not be
ascertained as it was unsigned. The learned ACMM, thus, concluded that such type of certificate
could be easily prepared by the landlord in favour of the person who was never in possession.
12. The aforesaid inferences drawn by the learned ACMM are borne out by the record. The two
documents, i.e., the consent terms (Exh.P3), whereby only a part of Flat No.4 was shown to be
allotted to the Accused No.2, and the certificate (Exh.P-5), whereby the first informant was shown to
be inducted into Flat No.6, by their own intrinsic evidence, were found unworthy of placing implicit
reliance. Moreover, in the face of unequivocal observations of the learned Judge, Court of Small
Causes, and no shred of Shraddha Talekar PS 6/9 7 CRI.APPEAL-294-1996.J.doc evidence to the
contrary, the learned ACMM was totally justified in disbelieving the bald testimony of Satish Kawali
(PW-2).
13. The testimony of Satish Kawali (PW-2), the prime witness of the prosecution, suffers from
infirmities. It is pertinent to note that Satish Kawali (PW-2) claimed to have accompanied the first
informant to Dadar Police Station for lodging the FIR on 29th April 1984 at about 9.00 PM.
Surprisingly, the statement of Satish Kawali (PW-2) came to be recorded on 4th May 1984, despite
his assertion that he was at the Police Station all the while when the report of the first informant
came to be recorded. The delay assumes significance in the backdrop of the fact that Satish Kawali
(PW-2) claimed to have first noticed the change in the lock of Flat No.6. He further claimed to have
informed the first informant about the same, and witnessed the wrongful restraint caused to the first
informant by the accused. In this setting of the matter, the delay in recording the statement of Satish
Kawali (PW-2), which was not at all explained by the IO Balasaheb Jadhav (PW-5) erodes the
credibility of the version of Satish Kawali (PW-2).
14. The learned ACMM further found that there was a serious doubt about the existence of a
standalone Flat No.6, without a WC Unit, apart from Flat No.4. This doubt was entertained because
of the fact that the approved plan of the building in question was not placed on record despite
Shraddha Talekar PS 7/9 8 CRI.APPEAL-294-1996.J.doc ample opportunities. The learned ACMM
further found that the rest of the flats, i.e., Flat Nos.3 and 5 were having self contained units and
there could not have been a singleton Flat No.6, apart from Flat No.4. This inference drawn by the
learned ACMM appears to be supported by the situation at the scene of occurrence as elicited from
the testimony of the prosecution witnesses.
15. To add to this, nothing could be recovered from the accused either by way of direct seizure or in
pursuance of the disclosure statement in the context of charge of theft. Thus, there is no
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/69338809/

4

State vs Vijay Wamanpatil & Ors. Vs Vijay ... on 14 March, 2019

circumstantial evidence which tends to connect the accused with the crime. The oral evidence of
Satish Kawali (PW-2), carries with it the taint of interestedness, in the context of inimical relations
on account civil dispute, and is otherwise unworthy of credence. Resultantly, I am persuaded to
agree with the view of the learned ACMM that the prosecution miserably failed to prove that the first
informant was in possession of Flat No.6 and accused committed house trespass by breaking open
the lock and in the process committed the offences of theft, mischief and wrongfully restrained the
first informant.
16. It is trite law that the Appellate Court is not expected to interfere with an order of acquittal
unless there are substantial or compelling reasons. The Appellate Court has to take into account the
fact that the acquittal reinforces the presumption of innocence. Likewise, due weightage Shraddha
Talekar PS 8/9 9 CRI.APPEAL-294-1996.J.doc to the benefit which the trial Court had of observing
the witnesses, including their demeanor, is required to be given. Viewed from this angle, in the
instant case, there appears no reason, much less, substantial or compelling one, to interfere with the
order of acquittal. Hence, the appeal deserves to be dismissed.
17. The appeal stands dismissed.
The bail bonds furnished by the accused stand cancelled. Sureties stand discharged.
The record and proceedings be sent back to the Court of the learned ACMM forthwith.

(N.J. JAMADAR, J.)

Shraddha Talekar PS

9/9

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/69338809/

5

