for educational use only
Sk. Bhalu @ Sk. Sakir @ Sk. Bholu & ... vs State Of West Bengal on 5 April, 2019

Calcutta High Court (Appellete Side)
Sk. Bhalu @ Sk. Sakir @ Sk. Bholu & ... vs State Of West Bengal on 5 April, 2019
Form No. J (1)
IN THE HIGH COURT AT CALCUTTA
CRIMINAL APPELLTE JURISDICTION
APPELLATE SIDE

Present:
The Hon'ble Justice Joymalya Bagchi
AND
The Hon'ble Justice Manojit Mandal

C.R.A. No.680 of 2016
SK. BHALU @ SK. SAKIR @ SK. BHOLU & ANR.
VERSUS
STATE OF WEST BENGAL
AND
C.R.A. No.626 of 2016
SK. KHAIBER @ SK. SAIFUL & ANR.
VERSUS
STATE OF WEST BENGAL

For the Appellants
In CRA 626 of 2016

: Ms. Monoti Gomes, Advocate

For the Appellants
In CRA 680 of 2016

: Mr. Soumyajit Das Mahapatra, Advocate
Mr. Suman Das Adhikary, Advocate

For the State

: Mr. Arun Kr. Maiti, ld. A.P.P.
Ms. Amita Gaur, Advocate

Heard on

: 05.04.2019

Judgment on

: 05.04. 2019

Joymalya Bagchi, J.:

Appeals are directed against the judgment and order dated 31.08.2016 and
02.09.2016

passed by the learned Additional District and Session Judge, First Court, Tamluk, Purba Medinipur
in Sessions Case No. 233(04)2013 corresponding to Sessions Trial No. 01(05)14 convicting the
appellants for commission of offence punishable under Sections 395 of the Indian Penal Code and
sentencing them to suffer rigorous imprisonment for ten years each, in default, to suffer simple
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130531429/

1

Sk. Bhalu @ Sk. Sakir @ Sk. Bholu & ... vs State Of West Bengal on 5 April, 2019

imprisonment for six months more.
The prosecution case, as alleged, against the appellants is to the effect that on 07.01.2013 at about
6.40 a.m. Subash Khatuya (P.W. 17) was driving a lorry bearing No.WB 29A 5124 being
accompanied with his helper Gurupada Bera (P.W.1) and one Sk. Bablu (P.W.2), representative of
businessmen who had hired them to transport human hair to Shalimar, Howrah. At about 7.15 a.m.
two vehicles, one white coloured and another sky-blue coloured Maruti car intercepted the lorry and
6-7 miscreants alighted from the said vehicles. They physically assaulted Subash and his helper
Gorupada and dragged them inside the white coloured vehicle while Bablu was dragged inside the
Suzuki car. Thereafter, they were drived to Lodhasuli jungle where the miscreants left them tied by
ropes to standing trees. Somehow they escaped and went to Lodhasuli P.S. Thereafter, they went to
Tamluk P.S. where first information report was registered by Subhas resulting in institution of the
present case.
In the course of investigation the appellants were arrested and were identified by P.Ws. 1, 2 and 17
during T.I. Parade examination. On 13.01.2013, 22 bags of human hair were recovered from a
vehicle bearing no. WB 33-B 4782 driven by Sk. Khaibar and 33 bags of human hair were
subsequently seized on the leading statement of Sk. Khaibar. The seized articles appear to have been
handed over to the custody of P.W.s 6 and 7 who claimed to be its owner.
In conclusion of investigation, charge-sheet was filed against the appellants and the case was
committed to the Court of Sessions and transferred to the Court of the learned Additional District
and Session Judge, First Court, Tamluk, Purba Medinipur for trial and disposal.
Charges were framed against the appellants and one Monir Mohammad under Sections 395/412 of
the Indian Penal Code. It was the defence of the appellants that they have been falsely implicated in
this case. Their identification in Court during T.I. Parade by P.W.s 1, 2 and 17 were of little
substance as they had been shown to the witnesses while in police custody.
In the course of trial, the prosecution examined twenty-nine witnesses and exhibited a number of
documents. In conclusion of trial, the trial judge by the impugned judgment and order dated
31.08.2016 and 02.09.2016 convicted and sentenced the appellants, as aforesaid. They were,
however, acquitted of the charge under Section 412 of the Indian Penal Code and co-accused Monir
Mohammad was acquitted of all the charges levelled against them.
Ms. Gomes and Mr. Mahapatra, learned counsels appearing for the appellants argued that the
identification of the appellants in Court & during T.I. Parade is extremely doubtful. P.Ws. 1, 2 and 17
admitted that they had seen the appellants at the police station prior to T.I. Parade examination.
None of the witnesses had disclosed the physical features including age, etc of miscreants either in
the first information report or in their statements to the police. Hence, their identification of the
appellants in Court cannot be relied upon. The seized articles were not produced and identified
during trial. In fact the Trial Judge acquitted the appellants of the offence under Section 412 IPC.
Hence, there is no legally admissible evidence connecting the appellants with the alleged crime.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130531429/

2

Sk. Bhalu @ Sk. Sakir @ Sk. Bholu & ... vs State Of West Bengal on 5 April, 2019

Mr. Maiti, learned Additional Public Prosecutor submitted that P.W. 17 deposed that he and others
had seen the appellants at the P.O. for the first time and thereafter in the police station and at
correctional home. Hence, identification of the appellants by the said witnesses as the dacoits who
committed robbery at the place of occurrence is wholly established. Soon after the occurrence,
stolen property was recovered from the appellants. Accordingly, the conviction and sentence do not
call for interference and the appeals are liable to be dismissed. P.Ws. 1,2 and 17 claimed to be
present at the time of alleged dacoity. P.W. 17 is the driver of the vehicle bearing No.WB 29A 5124
which was carrying human hair to Shalimar, Howrah for various businesses. P.W. 2 was the
representative of such businessmen and P.W. 1 was the laborer assisting P.W. 17 in driving the lorry.
All the witnesses deposed that at 7.15 a.m. when the vehicle had reached Nimtouri High Road, two
vehicles, one white in colour and another sky coloured Maruti Suzuki vehicle, stopped the aforesaid
vehicle on the road. 6-7 miscreants alighted from the vehicles and had forcibly removed the said
witnesses from the lorry carrying human hair. P.Ws.1 and 17 were forced into the white coloured
vehicle while P.W.2 was forcefully put into the sky coloured Maruti Suzuki car. Thereafter they were
driven to a nearby jungle and the miscreants tied them to standing trees and left. They somehow
untied themselves and went to the local police station. Although they initially went to Lodhasuli
outpost, PW17 lodged FIR (Ext.9) at Tamluk police station. Although such conduct on the part of
P.W.17 cannot be said to be unnatural, it is important to note that the said witness had not disclosed
features and other particulars relating to age, built and height of the miscreants in the first
information report. All the witnesses in cross-examination admitted that they remained in the police
station for a number of days upon suspicion that they may have had a hand in the dacoity. During
their stay at the police station, the appellants had been arrested and they had seen the appellants in
the said police station prior to T.I. parade.
Under such circumstances, identification of the appellants by the said witnesses during T.I. parade
as well as in court loses significance. It is pertinent to note that the learned Magistrates (P.W.23 and
28) who conducted T.I. Parade, had noted their T.I. Parade reports (Exts.11 and 13) that the
appellants had complained that they had been shown to the witnesses at the police station. Trial
Judge, however, relied on the identification of the aforesaid witnesses on the premises that P.W.17
had claimed that they had seen the miscreants for the first time at the place of occurrence.
I am unimpressed by such reasoning. P.W.17 had not described the features and other particulars of
the miscreants in the first information report. P.Ws.1 and 2 also did not describe the features of the
miscreants in earlier statements to the Investigating Officer (P.W.29). In the absence of the
description of the miscreants in their earlier statements to police, it is highly unsafe to rely on the
ipse dixit of the witnesses that they had seen the appellants at the place of occurrence. It is relevant
to note such identification of the appellants both in Court as well as in T.I. Parade admitted that
they had seen the appellants in the police station prior to the T.I. Parade Examination has to be
taken with a pinch of salt as the witnesses.
It was incumbent on the Investigating Agency to ensure that the identity of the accused persons is
not disclosed to the aforesaid witnesses in the course of investigation prior to holding T.I. Parade.
Failure to do so has struck at the root of the prosecution case with regard to the authenticity of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130531429/

3

Sk. Bhalu @ Sk. Sakir @ Sk. Bholu & ... vs State Of West Bengal on 5 April, 2019

identification of the appellants by the said witnesses which is the primary basis to come to a finding
of guilt against them.
It is pertinent to note that nothing was placed on record in the course of trial to establish that
human hair recovered from a vehicle driven by appellant Sk. Khaiber is the stolen alamat in the
instant case. In the course of investigation the seized hair were returned to P.W.6. No steps were
taken prior to return of the seized alamat to prepare inventory or take photographs/samples of the
seized articles and/or to produce such articles during trial.
There is no legally admissible evidence on record that the articles seized from the possession or
upon showing of the appellants during investigation were stolen property. In fact the trial judge had
acquitted the appellants of the charge under Section 412 IPC. Hence, no adverse inference can be
drawn against the appellants in terms of illustration (a) of section 114 of the Evidence Act. In light of
the aforesaid discussion, the conviction and sentence of the appellants are set aside.
The appeals are, accordingly, allowed.
Appellants shall be released from custody forthwith upon execution of a bond to the satisfaction of
the trial court which shall continue for six months in terms of Section 437A of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, if not wanted in any other cases.
Copy of the judgment along with L.C.R. be sent down to the trial court at once.
Before parting, I note with concern the lackadaisical manner in which the seized alamat had been
returned to P.Ws.6 and 7 without following adequate safeguards relating to the preservation and
ensuring production of alamat in court during trial.
It may not be out of place to refer the directions given by the Apex Court in Sunderbhai Ambalal
Desai Vs State of Gujarat reported in (2002) 10 SCC 283 for ensuring preservation and production
of seized articles which are returned to the complainant pending enquiry/trial:"For this purpose, if material on record indicates that such articles belong to the
complainant at whose house theft, robbery or dacoity has taken place, then seized
articles be handed over to the complainant after:
(1) preparing detailed proper panchnama of such articles;
(2) taking photographs of such articles and a bond that such articles would be
produced if required at the time of trial; and (3) after taking proper security".
No steps were taken to inventorize or take photographs of the seized articles before
returning to P.W.6 in the present case. Efforts have also not been made to ensure
production of such articles during trial. The aforesaid steps ought to have been taken
by the court below to ensure preservation and production of the best evidence, that is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130531429/

4

Sk. Bhalu @ Sk. Sakir @ Sk. Bholu & ... vs State Of West Bengal on 5 April, 2019

seized alamat, during trial.
In order to ensure avoidance of similar errors which may adversely affect the fate of future
prosecutions, Registrar General is directed to circulate a copy of this judgment to all Criminal
Courts in the State, so that the concerned judges/magistrates manning such courts do not fail to
take appropriate measures in terms of Sunderbhai Ambalal Desai (supra) while returning seized
alamat to claimants so as to ensure preservation and production of such alamat during trial.
Urgent Photostat Certified copy of this judgment, if applied for, be supplied expeditiously after
complying with all necessary legal formalities.
I agree.
(Manojit Mandal, J.)

(Joymalya Bagchi, J.)

aloke/ab&PA

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130531429/

5

