for educational use only
Debraj Dhur & Ors vs Kolkata Municipal Corporation & ... on 16 December, 2019

Calcutta High Court
Debraj Dhur & Ors vs Kolkata Municipal Corporation & ... on 16 December, 2019
O-18 & 19
IN THE HIGH COURT AT CALCUTTA
Civil Appellate Jurisdiction
ORIGINAL SIDE

APO No.554 of 2017
GA No.3496 of 2017
In
WP No.49 of 2017
DEBRAJ DHUR & ORS.
Versus
KOLKATA MUNICIPAL CORPORATION & ORS.
And
APO No.555 of 2017
In
WP No.49 of 2017
KOLKATA MUNICIPAL CORPORATION & ANR.
Versus
DEBRAJ DHUR & ORS.

BEFORE:
The Hon'ble JUSTICE SANJIB BANERJEE
And
The Hon'ble JUSTICE KAUSIK CHANDA
Date : 16th December, 2019.

Appearance:
Mr. Debabrata Saha Roy, Adv.
Mr. Pingal Bhattacharyya, Adv.
Mr. Subhankar Das, Adv.
Mr. Alok Kr. Ghosh, Adv.
2

The Court : Both these appeals arise out of an order dated
September 18, 2017 pertaining to the acquisition of land by the Kolkata

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127999847/

1

Debraj Dhur & Ors vs Kolkata Municipal Corporation & ... on 16 December, 2019

Municipal Corporation for the construction of a road in the Sinthee area.
According to the writ petitioners, no previous notice for acquisition was issued to
the owners of the land by the Kolkata Municipal Corporation and the land was
acquired in or about the year 1996-97. Though KMC maintains that due notice
had been served and the land-owners had also been informed of the quantum of
compensation that was payable to them, the writ petitioners in this case insist
that neither was any previous notice issued to the petitioners nor was any offer
made to receive compensation prior to the road being constructed on the writ
petitioners' land.
It appears that an initial writ petition was instituted in the year 2002
for the writ petitioners' land having been taken over by the Corporation without
any compensation being paid therefor. Such petition came to be disposed of on
July 16, 2002 after recording that the Commissioner had taken a decision for the
payment of compensation and that such decision would be conveyed to the writ
petitioners and the payment made within one month. The writ court observed
that in view of such submission, the writ petition had become "infructuous".
However, the writ court granted the following liberty to the writ petitioners:
"However, if the petitioners are dissatisfied with the amount of
compensation, they are free to challenge such decision before
the appropriate forum."
3

A second writ petition, WP No.11300(W) of 2003, followed.
petition was disposed of by an order dated April 1, 2005.

Such

In the opening

paragraph of the order, the Court observed that the acquisition in this case had
taken place without any notice or intimation to the writ petitioners. Such order
of April 1, 2005 provided as follows in its operative part:
"In the circumstances, I make it clear that accepting the
condition contained in the agreement will not disentitle the
petitioner to challenge the quantum of compensation that has
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127999847/

2

Debraj Dhur & Ors vs Kolkata Municipal Corporation & ... on 16 December, 2019

been fixed by the agreement in the instant case.
respondent authorities shall make over the amount of

The

compensation which has already been fixed by him upon execution of the agreement which was
been forwarded to the petitioner. The respondent authorities shall also complete the execution of
agreement within a period of four weeks from the date of communication of this order."
A third writ petition came to be filed thereafter in the form of the present proceedings. The writ
petition in the present case was disposed of with the following observation:
"In view of the peculiar facts involved in the instant case, it is axiomatic to record that
the Corporation must adopt the fair, reasonable and just compensation in
determining the market value prevalent at the time of its acquisition and not in a
whimsical and arbitrary manner as has been done in the instant case. The Petitioners
should be allowed to produce the relevant documents touching the market value
prevalent at the time of the acquisition and thereafter the Mayor-in-Council, who is
otherwise competent to determine the price under sub- Section 2 of Section 536
should fix the same.
There also appears to be a serious dispute on the quantum of land actually acquired
for such public purpose and therefore, this Court feels it necessary that a joint
inspection should be held by the Senior Officers of the Corporation and the
representative of the Petitioner to find out the extent of land acquired for widening
the road.
The aforesaid inspection should be done within 8(eight) weeks from the date of the
communication of this order. Thereafter, the compensation so determined by the
Mayor-in- Council should be reflected in the said agreement and all endeavor shall be
made to execute the same within 4(four) weeks from the date of such joint
inspection."
Both the writ petitioners and the Corporation are in appeal.
According to the writ petitioners, the court of the first instance erred in failing to appreciate that the
writ petitioners were entitled to much larger compensation than the mere value of land in the year
1996-97 when the acquisition was made. The Corporation has come up on the ground that since the
money was offered sometime in 2002 itself, the Corporation cannot be made liable for any interest
for the period thereafter or any additional amount that the writ petitioners may fancy that they are
entitled to.
The Corporation has referred to Sections 352 and 363 of the Kolkata Municipal Corporation Act,
1980 to submit that the Corporation is authorised to acquire land and the quantum of compensation
payable by the Corporation is provided for in Section 363 of the said Act. On the other hand, the
case run by the writ petitioners is that since no notice of any kind was issued prior to the petitioners'
land being taken, the petitioners are entitled to complete restitution or payment at a fair rate. The
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127999847/

3

Debraj Dhur & Ors vs Kolkata Municipal Corporation & ... on 16 December, 2019

petitioners do not consider that they would receive just compensation in terms of the order
impugned and insist that they are entitled to more.
Prima facie, Section 363 of the Act of 1980 appears to be anomalous. It is true that the Act of 1980
contains provisions for acquisition of land by the Corporation, inter alia, to widen roads and the like,
but there is no provision in the body of the statute as to how notice would be issued, on whom notice
would be issued, or the like. Though there is a system of calculation which has been indicated, yet no
mechanism indicated as to how to resolve an issue when the land-loser is dissatisfied with the
quantum of compensation. Further, the quantum of compensation indicated in Section 363 of the
Act may not be acceptable and Section 363 of the Act of 1980 may even be ultra vires the
Constitution.
The issue over here is not that because of the lack of initiation of acquisition proceedings, the entire
construction undertaken by the Corporation ostensibly for a public purpose must be undone. The
issue here is what would be the fair compensation due to the petitioners upon the petitioners
graciously accepting that their land has been acquired. In such a scenario, particularly, when at the
relevant time, there was the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 which guided as to how compensation
would be decided, it is difficult to accept that the Act of 1980 in this State would provide for a
different methodology for assessment or payment of lesser compensation than would be payable in
respect of acquisition of land under the Act of 1894.
Let a copy of this order be reached to learned Advocate General for the State for learned Advocate
General to be represented when the matter is next taken up.
What is evident is that despite the murmurs of the Corporation to the contrary, it has been
acknowledged at least in one judicial order that no previous notice was issued to the owners of the
land prior to its acquisition. Indeed, the owners claim that the extent of acquisition as shown by the
Corporation is less than the quantum of the writ petitioners' land that has been taken over by the
Corporation for the purpose of construction of the relevant road.
Accordingly, the relevant Land Acquisition Collector (I), Kolkata, is directed to conduct a survey
with the help of such officials as may be necessary for the purpose. The first exercise that the Land
Acquisition Collector will conduct is to ascertain the extent of the land acquired by the Corporation
and the extent of the land that was lost to the writ petitioners herein as a result of the relevant
acquisition. The LA Collector will, next, ascertain the compensation that would have been payable in
1996-97 for the acquisition of such land by the State from any private party in terms of the
provisions of the Act of 1894.
It will be open to both the Corporation and the writ petitioners to question the report of the LA
Collector to be submitted in terms of this order, both in respect of the extent of the land acquired
and the quantum of compensation payable.
This Court will try and assess the compensation payable as a reference would have under Section 18
of the Act of 1894. However, a degree of consensus has to be arrived at as to the quantum of land,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127999847/

4

Debraj Dhur & Ors vs Kolkata Municipal Corporation & ... on 16 December, 2019

particularly, since the area of land acquired from the writ petitioners will be evident from the
documents of title that the writ petitioners possess, the survey map and other records available to
the relevant LA Collector.
The LA Collector's report in terms of this order should be available by February 15, 2020.
The matters will appear before the appropriate Bench on February 24, 2020 for the parties to
indicate the further course of action.
Urgent certified website copies of this order, if applied for, be supplied to the parties upon
compliance with all requisite formalities.
(SANJIB BANERJEE, J.) (KAUSIK CHANDA, J.) sg.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127999847/

5

