for educational use only
Anil Gupta & Ors vs The State Of West Bengal & Ors on 28 February, 2019

Calcutta High Court
Anil Gupta & Ors vs The State Of West Bengal & Ors on 28 February, 2019
IN THE HIGH COURT AT CALCUTTA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
APPELLATE SIDE
Present:
THE HON'BLE ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE BISWANATH SOMADDER
AND
THE HON'BLE JUSTICE ARINDAM MUKHERJEE

MAT 1494 OF 2018
WITH
CAN 9635 OF 2018
Anil Gupta & Ors.
vs.
The State of West Bengal & Ors.

For Applicants/Appellants

: Mr. Jishnu Saha, Sr. Advocate,
with
Mr. Shuvashis Sengupta,
Mr.Sreya Basu Mallick,
Mr. Ankit Dey........Advocates

For the State

: Mr. Sakhaya Sen,
Mr. Amrita Lal Chaterjee........Advocates

Heard on

: 11.12.2018, 18.12.2018 & 21.02.2019

Judgment on

: 28.02.2019

ARINDAM MUKHERJEE, J. :
1)

This appeal is at the instance of the writ petitioners. The writ petitioners

are the five trustees of Raghunandanlal Sumitra Devi Educational Trust
(hereinafter referred to as the said 'trust'). The respondent nos. 1 to 5 in the

appeal as well as in the writ petition are the Fisheries Department of the State of West Bengal and its
different officers. Respondent No. 6 is the West Bengal Fisheries Corporation. The respondent no. 7
is a company established for the purpose for setting up a college and for promotion of technical
education for medical science, management studies etc.
2) The appellants say that by a registered indenture of lease dated 26th May, 2010 entered into by
and between the Fisheries Department, Government of West Bengal and the said trust represented
by the appellants, a plot of land measuring about 12.61 acres at Ramnagar, Purba Medinipur with an
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67991442/

1

Anil Gupta & Ors vs The State Of West Bengal & Ors on 28 February, 2019

unfinished super structure (hereinafter referred to as the said plot of land) was leased out to the
appellants by the Fisheries Department for a period of 99 years at an yearly lease rent of rupees five
lakhs only for the purpose of setting up an educational institute with hostels etc. Immediately
thereafter, the said trust through the appellants were put into possession of the said plot of land and
were in settled possession thereof till the time hereinafter mentioned. The appellants had also
deposited three cheques of rupees five lakhs each towards lease rent for the year 2010-11, 2011-12
and 2012-13. Out of the three cheques one cheque for rupees five lakhs towards lease rent for the
year 2010-11 was encashed by the respondent/Fisheries Department. The other two cheques were
lying unencashed with the department. Thereafter, the appellants have invested substantial sum of
money for executing the ground work before setting up of an educational institution with ancillary
facilities.
3) According to the appellants, the Fisheries Department by a letter dated 11th July, 2013
communicated the following:"in inviting you kind attention to the above mentioned reference and subject, the
undersigned is directed to inform you that as per decision taken by other related
Departments, this department has been advised to take immediate action for
cancellation of the Lease Deed already executed to this effect and request you to
report to this deptt. and receive back the two nos. of cheques each amounting to Rs. 5
lakhs that had been deposited as Lease rent for the year 2011-12 & 2012-13 (though
the encashment period of both cheques have lapsed) and acknowledge the same at
the earliest."
4) This letter was followed by another letter dated 3rd September, 2013 to the advocates for the
appellants which reads as follows:"In inviting your kind attention to the above mentioned subject and reference the
undersigned is directed to inform you that the reason for immediate action for
cancellation of the lease deed is that this department is no longer in a position to
lease out the land in question to any other body or continue with the lease agreement.
Since 1967 till date, the said area is only under the possession of the fisheries
department and fisheries department is not the owner of the said land. Title of the
said land has not yet been recorded in the name of this department.
The matter of leasing out 12.61 acres of land with structures in mouza Dakshin
Balarampur, J.L no-222 comprised in khaitan no-2, P.S - Ramnagar in favour of
Raghunandan Lal Sumitra Devi Educational Trust, for setting up of an engineering
college for 99 years was referred to L & LR Department. They observed that this act
of fisheries department is highly irregular as per Rules of Business and hence
fisheries department was advised to take immediate action for cancellation of the
said lease."

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67991442/

2

Anil Gupta & Ors vs The State Of West Bengal & Ors on 28 February, 2019

After these two letters were written, the Fisheries Department took no steps and the appellants also
did not collect the two cheques lying with the Fisheries Department. The appellants continued to be
in possession of the said plot of land and to protect their rights filed a suit before the learned District
Court. The said suit, however, has not been proceeded with by the appellants after finding the
Fisheries Department has not taken any step upon issuing the notices in 2013.
5) The appellants, subsequently, by a letter dated 7th February, 2018 requested the Fisheries
Department to reconsider and revalidate the lease. In the said letter, the appellants has set out the
entire facts relevant to the case.
6) Long thereafter, by a letter dated 4th September, 2018 the Fisheries Department, terminated the
lease with immediate effect and directed the appellants to make over possession of the said plot to
the Managing Director, West Bengal Fisheries Corporation Limited and to collect three numbers of
lapsed pay orders from the department. The contents of the letter are set out hereunder for
convenience:"WHEREAS you had been granted the right as spelt out in the Lease Agreement
dated 26.05.2010 read with JV Agreement and MOU dated 26.05.2010.
AND WHEREAS in compliance with the views of Ld. Land Reforms Commissioner &
Ld. Legal Remembrancer. West Bengal, Fisheries Department has decided to
terminate the Lease in respect of the Plot of Land measuring 12.61 acres with super
structure in Mouza Dakshin Balarampur, J.L. No. 222, Khaitan No. 2, Plot Nos.
5(Part), 6(Part) & 7(Part) P.S. Ramnagar, Dist. Purba Medinipur with immediate
effect. Now, therefore, This is to intimate you that the aforesaid lease agreement
stand terminated with immediate effect and you are hereby notified to hand over the
possession of the said Plot to the Managing Director, West Bengal. Fisheries
Corporation Limited and to collect the 3nos. of lapsed pay orders from this
Department within 10(Ten) working days from the date of receipt of this Notice."
7) After issuing a demand for justice through their advocates on 26th September, 2018 wherein the
Fisheries Department was requested not to take any illegal action or to take forcible possession of
the said plot of land, the appellants challenged the acts of the Fisheries Department, and in
particular, the notice of cancellation dated 4th September, 2018, by approaching the writ court on or
about 4th October, 2018 when the writ petition was filed.
8) During the pendency of the writ petition, the appellants on 9th October, 2018 received a letter
dated 1st October, 2018 issued by the West Bengal Fisheries Corporation Limited which contains a
threat of dispossession. This letter was issued by Special Officer Shankarpur Fishing Harbour. The
contents of the said letter are set out hereunder:"It is to inform you that, we have received a Letter vide Govt. Order No.
2371-Fish/C-III/2M-2/2010 (Pt.-II) Dt. 19-sep-2018, from The Deputy Secretary,
Govt. of West Bengal, Fisheries Department for taken over the possession of land
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67991442/

3

Anil Gupta & Ors vs The State Of West Bengal & Ors on 28 February, 2019

Measuring 12.61 acres with super structure in Mouza Dakshin Balarampur J.L No.
222 Khatian no. 2, plots Nos. 5(part), 6(Part) & 7(part), P.S - Ramnagar, Dist. Purba
Medinipur which have been handed over to West Bengal Fisheries Corporation
Limited. (copy enclosed) and cancellation of Lease Granted vide agreement dated
26th day of May-2010 read with MOU and JV Agreement dated 26.05.2010 vide
Govt. Order No. 2218-Fish/C-III/2M-2/2010 (pt.-II) Dated 04.09.2018 (copy
enclosed).
Above this Context you are requested to vacate the mentioned property possession
within 10 (Ten) days from issue of this letter, if you don't obey this order necessary
steps will be taken according to the Government norms & orders."
The appellants say that, with the letter dated 1st October, 2018 an internal memo dated 19th
September, 2018 written by the Deputy Secretary, Government of West Bengal, Department of
Fisheries to the Managing Director, West Bengal Fisheries Corporation Limited which contains a
marginal note wherein the Special Officer Shankarpur Fishing Harbour is requested to take over
possession with immediate effect and the letter dated 4th September, 2018 were also received by the
appellants. The contents of the memo dated 19th September, 2018 are set out hereunder:"The undersigned is directed to request him to take over the possession of land
measuring 12.61 acres with super structure in Mouza Dakshin Balarampur. J.L. No.
222, Khatian No.2 Plot Nos. 5 (Part), 6(Part) & 7 (Part) P.S. Ramnagar Dist. Purba
Medinipur that have been leased out to Raghunandan Lal Sumitra Devi Educational
Trust vide lease agreement dt. 26.05.2010 at the earliest. In enclosing the copy of the
notice of cancellation of the lease, he is further requested to intimate this office at
once the same has been done."
9) These letters were brought on record by the appellants by way of a supplementary affidavit
affirmed on 9th October, 2018.
10) After going through the letters referred to hereinabove, it appears that the Fisheries Department
was in possession of the said plot of land along with surrounding lands for several years and, as
such, it leased out the said plot of land by a registered deed upon receiving three years lease rent in
advance from the appellants. Subsequently, the Fisheries Department was advised by other
departments that the lease was illegal and, as such, the same should be cancelled. The alleged
ground of termination is that the Fisheries Department are not the owners of the said land. The
land, however, belongs to the Government which is not in dispute. It is also the contention of the
respondents that of the Land Reforms Department, Government of West Bengal owns the said plot
of land.
11) Be that as it may, the appellants' entry to the said land and to the possession thereof was by dint
of a registered deed of lease dated 26th May, 2010 for 99 years executed by the Fisheries
Department, Government of West Bengal. The appellants believed in the representations made by
the Fisheries Department and altered its position by relying upon such representations and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67991442/

4

Anil Gupta & Ors vs The State Of West Bengal & Ors on 28 February, 2019

believing them to be true and correct. Assuming without admitting that the Fisheries Department
was not the actual owner of the said land but, it belongs to another government department then
also the appellants did not enter into possession of the land of its own so as to be termed as a rank
trespasser. In such a situation, we find that the appellants cannot be hauled up for any fault of
themselves. It is the Fisheries Department who has created the mess. The appellants' possession,
therefore, cannot said to be unlawful without the allegations made by the Fisheries Department and
the Land Reforms Department are proved. The writ court cannot go into the validity or invalidity of
the title or of the lease deed. Therefore, it cannot be said that the appellants has entered into
possession of the said plot of land without any authority. Its possession may be at best be irregular
on the land being found not to be that of the Fisheries Department but belonging to the Land
Reforms Department, since the character of the land remains to be a government land whether it
belongs to any other government department. In such a situation, neither the Fisheries Department
nor the Special Officer, Shankarpur Fishing Harbour could have dispossessed the appellants without
due process of law. The writ petition was moved on 12th October, 2018 when the learned Single
Judge held that "The issue raised in the writ petition are such that an opportunity should be
awarded to the respondents to file affidavit". Affidavit- in-opposition was to be filed within two
weeks from the dated of the said order. Records reveal that no affidavit has been filed by the
respondent nos. 1to 6 to put forth their case. The appellants say that the order dated 12th October,
2018 was communicated to the officer-in-charge Mandarmoni Police Station on 17th November,
2018 but were forcefully dispossessed by the respondent nos. 1 to 6 with the police help on 18th
November, 2018. Immediately thereafter, on 19th November, 2018 the appellants affirmed an
application for restoration of possession being CAN No. 8999 of 2018.
12) On 22nd November, 2018 the appellants filed a supplementary affidavit in the application for
restoration of possession stating specifically that they were dispossessed on 18th November, 2018
which date was missing in the said restoration of possession application.
13) The application for restoration of possession was heard on 26th November, 2018 when the
learned Single Judge passed the following order:"Supplementary affidavit filed in Court today be taken on record. None appears for
the respondents.
In the present application, the applicants claim that, they were dispossessed
subsequent to the filing of the writ petition. The applicants did not specify the date of
dispossession in this application. The supplementary affidavit seeks to improve upon
the pleadings. The supplementary affidavit claims that, the applicants were
dispossessed on November 18, 2018.
In the facts of the present case, it would be appropriate to permit the parties to file
affidavits.
Let affidavit-in-opposition be filed one week after the Christmas Vacation. Reply
thereto, if any, be filed within a day thereafter. The application be listed under the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67991442/

5

Anil Gupta & Ors vs The State Of West Bengal & Ors on 28 February, 2019

same heading on January 4, 2019. Urgent certified website copies of this order, if
applied for, be made available to the parties upon compliance of the requisite
formalities."
14) We find that the appellants have specifically urged that they were dispossessed during the
pendency of the writ petition as there was no interim order directing its possession, though it had
approached the Court prior to being actually dispossessed. Prior to moving the application for
restoration of possession the appellants had stated by way of a supplementary affidavit that they
were dispossessed on 19th November, 2018. There is no denial of that fact that either orally or by
way of an affidavit even when the appeal is heard. On the contrary, the respondent nos. 1 to 6 has
tried to justify the taking over of possession.
15) It is well settled principle of law that even a trespasser cannot be evicted without due process of
law. It is also well settled that doctrine of frustration does not apply to leases. Noticing the above
factual matrix, we invited the parties for a practical amicable solution to the issue of dispossession.
The appellants expressed their intention to abide by any reasonable offer or solution in line with the
lease deed dated 26th May, 2010. The respondent nos. 1 to 6, however, came up with an instruction
from the Department of Land and Land Reforms and Refugee Reliefs and Rehabilitation
Department, Government of West Bengal dated 22nd January, 2019. The instruction so handed over
to the Court reads as follows:"With reference to above, the undersigned is directed to offer the views of this
Department as under"In so far as allotment of Govt. Land on LTS to the private Companies/Trusts etc. is
guided by the Land Allotment Policy, 2012, if applied for. The petitioners may apply
before this Deptt. accordingly. While considering the said LTS on merit the requisite
payment of Salami and annual rent will have to be paid by the would be lessee."
On perusal of such instruction, it appears that the appellants even on being dispossessed without
due process of law have to apply before the said department under the Land Allotment Policy, 2012,
which will be considered on merit and requisite payment of salami and annual rent will have to be
paid by the would be lessee.
16) As discussed above, the registered lease deed was executed on 26th May, 2010, when the Land
Allotment Policy, 2012 did not come into effect. For no fault of the appellants, we are unable to
accept the proposal for the appellants to apply under the provisions of a guideline which was
nonexistent at the date of execution of the lease deed, apart from the fact that, the appellants are not
agreeable to such terms.
17) We have considered the argument advanced by the respondent nos. 1to 6 to the extent that the
appellants do not have any right to remain in possession as the lease is invalid and that the said
respondents have offered to refund of the lease rent received by it thereby causing no prejudice to
the appellants as also justifying the dispossession due to invalidity of the lease. Assuming without
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67991442/

6

Anil Gupta & Ors vs The State Of West Bengal & Ors on 28 February, 2019

admitting that the lease is invalid, then also it does not give the respondent nos. 1 to 6 the right to
dispossess the appellants without observing due process of law particularly when the respondents
have issued a termination notice and the lease is a registered one for 99 years. The dispossession of
the appellants has admittedly taken place in the instant case, without observing due process of law
that too during the pendency of the writ petition. The State or its instrumentalities cannot indulge in
such an act which is per se, arbitrary and in violation of the principles of natural justice and void in
law. The lease dated 26th May, 2010 being a registered document is governed by the provisions of
the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 which specify the modalities for taking possession on the lease
being terminated. These modalities cannot be given a go bye even if it is alleged that the lease is an
invalid one. This issue requires adjudication which the writ court is not in a position to adjudicate as
it requires evidence and trial.
18) In the facts and circumstances, as aforesaid, we direct the respondent no. 1 to 6 and the Land
and Land Reforms and Refugee Reliefs and Rehabilitation Department, Government of West Bengal
to restore the possession of the said plot of land as described in the schedule of the lease deed dated
26th May, 2010 to the appellants immediately, but not later than four weeks from the date of this
order. The appellants will not alienate, encumber, part with or create any third party interest upon
being restored back to possession. If the appellants make any improvement to the property, they will
also not claim any equity. The respondents, however, will be at liberty to proceed against the
appellants by observing due process of law in order to recover possession. Since the writ Court
cannot decide the issue of the lease being invalid which requires evidence and trial, there remains no
further issues to be decided in the writ petition.
19) The appeal and the writ petition from where the order under appeal emanates are disposed of
accordingly, keeping all other points save as discussed above open. We have also not gone into the
merits of any other issue, save as discussed above.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Urgent photostat certified copy of this order/judgment, if applied for, be supplied to the parties on a
priority basis.
(ARINDAM MUKHERJEE, J.) (BISWANATH SOMADDER, A.C.J.)

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67991442/

7

