for educational use only
Chaitu S/O. Madi Atram (In Jail) vs State Of Maharashtra Thr. Its ... on 19 July, 2019

Bombay High Court
Chaitu S/O. Madi Atram (In Jail) vs State Of Maharashtra Thr. Its ... on 19 July, 2019
Bench: P.N. Deshmukh

apeal
1/10

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY
NAGPUR BENCH, NAGPUR.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.94 OF 2019.
Chaitu S/o Madi Atram,
Age about 38 years,
Occupation Cultivation,
R/o. Alapalli, Tahsil Aheri,
District Gadchiroli.

...APPE

Versus
The State of Maharashtra, through
P.S.O., P.S. Aheri,
District Gadchiroli.

...RESPONDE

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Ms. S.D.Wankhede, Advocate for appellant.
Mr. M.K.Pathan, Additional Public Prosecutor for respondent.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------CORAM : P.N.DESHMUKH &
MRS. PUSHPA V. GANEDIWALA, JJ.

DATE OF RESERVE : 25.06.2019.
DATE OF PRONOUNCEMENT : .07.2019.
JUDGMENT : (PER PUSHPA V. GANEDIWALA, J.) This is an appeal against conviction of the
appellant for the murder of his wife. He is sentenced for life imprisonment and to pay fine of
Rs.500/-, in default, rigorous imprisonment for six months in Crime No. 27/2015 registered at
Police Station, Aheri, District Gadchiroli in Sessions Case No. 105/2015.
2. The prosecution story, in brief, is as under:(i) The appellant - accused - Chaitu was the husband of the deceased - Bhingari Chaitu Atram. The
accused and the deceased were residing separately. The deceased was residing at Alapalli in a apeal
94.19.odt rented room of the informant - Ramchandra Bakka Bhedke, while the accused was
residing at Tadgaon, Tahsil Bhamragad, District Gadchiroli. The three children of the couple were
residing at Tadgaon. The deceased - Bhingari was working as a labourer on construction site. The
accused used to visit her room frequently. He was addicted to liquor and used to quarrel with the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6390395/

1

Chaitu S/O. Madi Atram (In Jail) vs State Of Maharashtra Thr. Its ... on 19 July, 2019

deceased.
(ii) On 29/06/2015, in the morning, the owner of the room- Ramchandra Bhedke came to know
about the murder of Bhingari by the accused by means of an 'Axe'. He saw the dead body of Bhingari
was lying in her rented room on the floor in a pool of blood with bleeding injuries on her neck, back
and hands. The accused was found on the spot. Ramchandra Bhedke immediately informed the
Police Station, Aheri, District Gadchiroli. Accordingly, a crime was registered against the accused for
the offence punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code vide F.I.R. No.27/2015 (Exh.15).
(iii) The Police Inspector - Sanjay More (PW/10) drew spot panchanama and seized articles viz.
bed-sheet, scarf, axe and one black bids necklace from the spot. He also drew inquest panchanama
(Exh.40). As the accused was present on the spot, he was taken in custody and then arrested. Blood
stained clothes of the accused were seized from his-person vide seizure panchanama (Exh.42). The
hands of the accused were found smeared with blood. The accused was sent for medical examination
along with the request for collecting hand-wash, foot-wash, nail clippings, blood samples and
further request was made to verify whether the accused was under the influence of liquor. The blood
stained clothes of the deceased were also seized (Exh.45). P.I. - Shri More recorded apeal 94.19.odt
statements of the witnesses. The dead body of the deceased was forwarded for autopsy vide
forwarding letter Exh.31. P.I. - Shri More also forwarded a query about the weapon to the Medical
Officer along with the weapon of offence. The seized Muddemal was sent for Chemical Analyzer's
report vide forwarding letter Exh. 19 and 20.
(iv) After investigation, P.I. - Shri More filed charge-sheet before the Court of Judicial Magistrate
First Class, Aheri, District Gadchiroli which in its turn committed the case to the Sessions Court,
Gadchiroli as the offence of murder is exclusively triable by the Court of Sessions. The Court of
Sessions framed charge of murder against the accused and recorded his plea. He denied the charge
and claimed to be tried.
(v) To prove the charge against the accused the prosecution has examined in all 10 witnesses and
also brought on record the relevant documents and Muddemal which was seized during
investigation. The trial Court recorded the statement of the accused under Section 313 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure. The accused claimed to be innocent. He was called upon to enter his defence to
which he denied.
(vi) The learned Sessions Court after hearing both the sides and on the basis of material before him
found the accused guilty of the charge of murder of his wife by means of an 'Axe' and sentenced him
for life imprisonment and fine of Rs.500/-, in default, rigorous imprisonment for six months by
judgment and order dated 30/01/2018. The impugned judgment is challenged in this appeal.
3. We have heard Ms. S.D.Wankhede, learned Advocate for apeal 94.19.odt appellant and Mr.
M.K.Pathan, learned Additional Public Prosecutor for State.
4. The learned counsel for the appellant categorically submitted that the whole case is dependent on
the circumstantial evidence and the chain of circumstances to reach to the conclusion against the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6390395/

2

Chaitu S/O. Madi Atram (In Jail) vs State Of Maharashtra Thr. Its ... on 19 July, 2019

accused is not complete. Barring one or two witnesses, all the other witnesses turned hostile and
preferred not to support the prosecution case. It is further submitted that on the basis of conjectures
and surmises, the accused cannot be convicted in the given facts and circumstances. A cogent and
consistent evidence pointing conclusively the guilt towards the accused is required and which is
missing in this case. The learned counsel for the appellant took us through the relevant part of the
evidence of the witnesses and submitted that the prosecution has miserably failed to prove its case
and therefore accused is entitled to be acquitted.
5. On the contrary, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor on behalf of the State supported the
impugned judgment and order of the trial Court. He submitted that, the accused was found on the
spot. His hands were smeared with blood. His clothes were also found stained with blood. All these
articles show human blood group "AB" which was the blood group of the deceased. He also
emphasized on the extra judicial confession given by the accused for committing murder of his wife
in front of the witnesses present there. He submits that the accused is a habitual drunkard and used
to ill-treat his wife and used to demand money from her. There used to be frequent quarrels between
the couple. This shows motive of the accused to commit murder of his wife. The case of the
prosecution is further corroborated with the evidence of last seen of apeal 94.19.odt the accused
with his wife and thus the learned Additional Public Prosecutor prayed for dismissal of appeal.
6. We have considered the submissions made on behalf of both the parties. Perused the record and
the impugned judgment. At the outset, out of 10 witnesses, only 3 witnesses i.e. the Informant, the
Medical Officer and the Investigation Officer supported the prosecution case. The whole of the
prosecution case is dependent on the circumstantial evidence. There is no eye-witness. Though,
PW/1
- Ramchandra Bhedke - the informant, who was the landlord of the deceased, claimed to have seen
the accused lastly along with the deceased at 8.00 p.m. on the day of the incident in her room
quarreling with the deceased, however, he does not say this material fact in his First Information
Report (Exh.15). Furthermore, PW/1 - Ramchandra testified that he saw the accused at the door of
the room of the deceased at about 12.00 p.m. However, this fact is also missing from his report. On
the contrary, in the F.I.R. he says that in the morning while he was in the house situated in his field,
the other tenants came and informed him about death of the deceased - Bhingari. Immediately, he
rushed to the spot and thereafter lodged the F.I.R. In such facts situations, the testimony of this
witness as regards "last seen theory" cannot be relied on. As such, the material link of 'last seen' is
missing in this case in the chain of circumstances.
7. PW/9 - Rina - the daughter of the accused though initially did not support the prosecution story,
however, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor succeeded to bring on record some facts
supporting the prosecution story from the mouth of this witness. PW/9 admitted that her father was
regularly harassing her apeal 94.19.odt mother and therefore she left the company of the accused
and started residing at Alapalli prior to four years. Her father is a drunkard and used to beat her
mother as she was residing separately leaving children. She has also admitted that her father used to
come to Alapalli for demanding money for liquor and her mother used to drive him out.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6390395/

3

Chaitu S/O. Madi Atram (In Jail) vs State Of Maharashtra Thr. Its ... on 19 July, 2019

8. PW/10 - P.I. - Shri More testified about the presence of the accused on the spot when he reached
the spot and the hands of the accused were smeared with blood and as per the Chemical Analyzer's
report, the hand-wash of the accused matches with the blood group of the deceased.
9. PW/5 - Ashish Devrao Lohakare is on the point of extra judicial confession by the accused in front
of him. This witness preferred not to support the prosecution case. He denied all the suggestions. In
his examination-in-chief, he said he does not know the accused - Chaitu Atram. The learned
Additional Public Prosecutor with permission of the Court put some leading questions to this
witness. However, he denied all the suggestions except one. He has admitted that when he inquired
about the incident with the accused, he told that he murdered his wife and thereafter Kumarish
Biswas, Sheikh Mehboob and Sheikh Jalal had given information to Ramchandra Bhedke and
thereafter police came there. He denied the suggestion that it did not happen that the accused
uttered the words loudly that he had committed murder of his wife - the deceased - Bhingari on
suspicion that she had illicit relations with other person.
10. One stray admission regarding extra judicial confession by the hostile witness, in our opinion,
would not be sufficient unless apeal 94.19.odt there is a substantive evidence. Moreover, the
prosecution did not examine a single neighboring witness i.e. Kumarish Biswas, Sheikh Mehboob
and Sheikh Jalal, who could have thrown light on the incident, though PW/10 - P.I. - Shri More
recorded their statements during investigation.
11. Furthermore, the admissions by the daughter of the accused, in our opinion, even not sufficient
to draw an inference that the accused killed the deceased, though it could show the probable motive
to commit murder.
12. Moreover, none of the Panch witnesses supported the seizure of articles during investigation.
Evidently, the seized articles, before sending it for Chemical Analyzer's report, were lying with the
Police Inspector for more than 20 days. The possibility of tampering with the articles cannot be
denied. In such circumstances, seizure of Muddemal and the supportive Chemical Analyzer's report
have the element of doubt to prove the case against the accused. No doubt, in some cases, the
evidence of Police Inspector is considered trustworthy if the Panch witnesses do not support the
prosecution case. In the instant case, which is based on circumstantial evidence, even the other
material witnesses did not support the prosecution case. Only on the basis of presumption and
surmises and the evidence of Investigation Officer, the conviction for the offence of murder cannot
be recorded. It is consistently being held in the catena of judgments of the Apex Court that in the
case based on circumstantial evidence, the cogent, clinching and consistent evidence is required.
13. From the above three prosecution witnesses, the following circumstances can be deduced.
apeal 94.19.odt (1) Homicidal death of the deceased - Bhingari.
(2) She was residing separately from
husband/accused due to his harassment.
(3)

her

The accused is a habitual drunkard.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6390395/

4

Chaitu S/O. Madi Atram (In Jail) vs State Of Maharashtra Thr. Its ... on 19 July, 2019

(4) He used to come deceased's room and used to demand money for liquor and she used to drive
him out.
(5) In the morning of 29/06/2015, the accused was seen in her room when the body of the deceased
was lying on the floor of her room in a pool of blood.
(6) The hands of the accused were smeared with blood and blood stains were found on his clothes.
The accused is silent as to under what circumstances his hands got smeared with blood though these
facts are within his special knowledge.
14. Now, the question is whether these circumstances complete the chain of circumstances so as to
draw an inference that none other than the accused has committed murder of the deceased
- Bhingari. In our opinion, these circumstances are not of definite tendency unerringly pointing
towards the guilt of the accused. There are the following missing links in the chain of circumstances.
(i) Nobody had seen the accused with the deceased within a reasonable proximity of time prior to
the incident.
(ii) Nothing has come on record as to when did the accused reach the spot, pre-incident or post
incident.
(iii) Nothing has come on record as to procurement of weapon of offence (Axe) by the accused.
(iv) None of the Panch witnesses supported the prosecution case. The seizure of the articles could
apeal 94.19.odt not be proved through the independent witnesses.
(v) Delayed forwarding of seized Muddemal for Chemical Analyzer's report. Possibility of tampering
with the articles can not be ruled out.
(vi) The prosecution failed to examine the material neighboring witnesses.
(vii) The possibility of murder by any third person cannot be ruled out.
15. The law as regards circumstantial evidence is well settled in the catena of judgments and the
following principles with regards circumstantial evidence is still holding the field.
(1) the circumstances from which an inference of guilt is sought to be drawn must be cogently and
firmly established;
(2) those circumstances should be of a definite tendency unerringly pointing towards the guilt of the
accused;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6390395/

5

Chaitu S/O. Madi Atram (In Jail) vs State Of Maharashtra Thr. Its ... on 19 July, 2019

(3) the circumstances, taken cumulatively, should form a chain so complete that there is no escape
from the conclusion that within all human probability the crime was committed by the accused and
none else, and (4) the circumstantial evidence in order to sustain conviction must be complete and
incapable of explanation on any other hypothesis than that of the guilt of the accused and such
evidence should not only be consistent with the guilt of the accused but should be inconsistent with
his innocence."
apeal 94.19.odt
16. There is no doubt about the fact that the death of the deceased is homicidal. However, for want
of clinching, cogent and consistent evidence, the accused is entitled for benefit of doubt. The
conviction of the accused recorded by the trial court needs to be quashed and set aside.
17. In the circumstances, we pass the following the order:ORDER
(i) The appeal is allowed.
(ii) The judgment and order dated 30/01/2018 passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Gadchiroli, in
Sessions Case No.105/2015, is hereby quashed and set-aside. The appellant/accused - Chaitu Madi
Atram is acquitted of the offence punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code in Crime
No.27/2015 dated 29/06/2015 registered by Police Station Aheri, District Gadchiroli.
(iii) The accused is in jail, he shall be released forthwith, if not required in any other case.
(iv) The Muddemal being useless be destroyed.
(v) The criminal appeal is disposed off accordingly.
(vi) Criminal Application No. 141/2019 stands disposed of.
JUDGE

JUDGE

Sumit

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6390395/

6

