for educational use only
N. Ramamurthy vs State By Central Bureau Of ... on 26 April, 2019

Supreme Court of India
N. Ramamurthy vs State By Central Bureau Of ... on 26 April, 2019
Author: D Maheshwari
Bench: M 1 Dinesh, A M Sapre
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 751-752 OF 2019
(Arising out of SLP(Crl.) Nos. 1771-1772 of 2019)
N. RAMAMURTHY

. APPELLANT(S)
VS.

STATE BY CENTRAL BUREAU
OF INVESTIGATION, A.C.B., BENGALURU

.RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

Dinesh Maheshwari, J.
Leave granted.
2. In these appeals, the appellant-accused has called in question the orders dated 03.01.2019 and
29.01.2019 passed by the High Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru in IA Nos. 1 of 2018 and 1 of 2019 in
Criminal Appeal No. 2000 of 2018 whereby, the High Court has rejected his prayer under Section
389 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC) for suspension of execution of sentence during the
pendency of appeal.
3. The background aspects, so far relevant for the present purpose, could be noticed, in brief, as
follows:
Signature Not Verified Digitally signed by ANITA MALHOTRA Date: 2019.04.29 17:57:09 IST
Reason:
3.1. The appellant herein was tried as Accused No. 2 in Special Criminal Case No. 12 of 2002 for the
offences under Section 120-B read with Sections 409, 420, 468, 471, 477-A of the Indian Penal Code
('IPC') and Section 13(2) read with Sections 13(1)(c) and (d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1988 ('PC Act').
3.2. The prosecution case had been that during the years 1995-96, the appellant and the Accused No.
1, who were respectively working as clerk and manager in the State Bank of Mysore, entered into a
criminal conspiracy and committed several acts of breach of trust, cheating, forgery, falsification of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40293556/

1

N. Ramamurthy vs State By Central Bureau Of ... on 26 April, 2019

accounts and misappropriation of funds. It was, inter alia, alleged that the accused persons raised
fraudulent debits to the extent of Rs. 23,53,090/- in various accounts maintained by the customers
in the bank like Savings Bank Account, Current Account, Term Deposit, Reinvestment Deposit etc;
and the amount so debited was fraudulently credited to the personal accounts of the appellant and
was obtained by forging the withdrawals. It was also alleged that during the year 1996, both the
accused persons fraudulently added a fictitious name K. Prabhakara to Savings Bank Account No.
1400 existing in the name of R. Madhusudana, though the specimen signatures of K. Prabhakara
were not available in the bank; fraudulent credits were posted in the said Savings Bank Account No.
1400 to the tune of Rs. 9,46,399/-; and subsequently, the appellant made withdrawals on different
dates from the said account by forging the signatures of K. Prabhakara. It was also alleged that the
Accused No. 1 permitted several temporary Overdrafts for substantial amounts in different Current
Accounts in excess of his powers and suppressed these facts from the controller; and that such
accounts were closed after misappropriation of funds.
3.3. In view of the short question involved in these appeals, all the factual aspects of the case need
not be elaborated herein. Suffice would be to notice for the present purpose that during the trial,
Accused No. 1 expired and the matter stood abated qua him. However, after due trial in Special Case
No. 12 of 2002, the Court of XLVI Additional City Civil and Sessions Judge and Special Judge for
C.B.I. Cases, by its judgment dated 22.10. 2018, convicted the appellant for the offences aforesaid
while holding that he had forged the signatures of many customers, had created withdrawal slips
with dishonest intention, and had misappropriated the amount of various depositors from their
accounts. The Trial Court proceeded to award the sentence/s to the appellant as follows1:
"The accused No. 2 for the offence under Section 120B IPC shall undergo rigorous
imprisonment of seven years and pay fine of Rs. 50,000/-, in default to pay the fine
amount, shall further undergo simple imprisonment for one year.
The accused No. 2 for the offence under Section 420 IPC shall undergo rigorous
imprisonment of seven years and pay fine of Rs. 50,000/-, in default to pay the fine
amount, shall further undergo simple imprisonment for one year.
The accused No. 2 for the offence under Section 409 IPC shall undergo rigorous
imprisonment of seven years and pay fine of Rs. 50,000/-, in default to pay the fine
amount, shall further undergo simple imprisonment for one year.
The accused No. 2 for the offence under Section 468 IPC shall undergo rigorous imprisonment of
seven years and pay 1 Extraction from pp. 270-272 of the SLP paper-book fine of Rs. 50,000/-, in
default to pay the fine amount, shall further undergo simple imprisonment for one year.
The accused No. 2 for the offence under Section 471 IPC shall undergo rigorous imprisonment of
three years and pay fine of Rs. 25,000/-, in default to pay the fine amount, shall further undergo
simple imprisonment for six months.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40293556/

2

N. Ramamurthy vs State By Central Bureau Of ... on 26 April, 2019

The accused No. 2 for the offence under Section 477A IPC shall undergo rigorous imprisonment of
seven years and pay fine of Rs. 50,000/-, in default to pay the fine amount, shall further undergo
simple imprisonment for one year.
The accused No. 2 for the offence under Section 13(2) r/w. 13(1) (c) & (d) of Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 shall undergo rigorous imprisonment of seven years and pay fine of Rs.
50,000/-, in default to pay the fine amount, shall further undergo simple imprisonment for one
year. All the sentences shall run concurrently.
Accused No. 2 is entitled for set off u/S. 428 of Criminal Procedure Code, for the period already
undergone in Judicial Custody, if any."
(underlining supplied for emphasis) 3.4. Aggrieved by the judgment and order aforesaid, the
appellant preferred an appeal, being Criminal Appeal No. 2000 of 2018, before the High Court of
Karnataka at Bengaluru. The said appeal has been admitted for hearing by the High Court. The
appellant also moved an application seeking suspension of execution of sentence (IA No. 1 of 2018)
that was considered and dismissed by the High Court on 03.01.2019 while observing, inter alia, that
"the sentence of imprisonment all put together comes to 45 years of rigorous imprisonment (for all
the proven guilt put together)". While rejecting the contentions urged on behalf of the appellant, the
High Court observed that the evidence pointed towards the guilt of the appellant; that
non-examination of hand-writing expert was not a convincing ground for seeking suspension when
other evidence and material were available on record; that looking to the nature of the offence
alleged, designation of the appellant, whether as clerk or in any other capacity, was immaterial; that
when the appellant was 66 years of age, many age-related ailments were natural but it was incorrect
to say that while serving the sentence, he was deprived of proper medical care. The High Court also
referred to the decision of this Court in the case of Navjot Singh Sidhu vs. State of Punjab: (2007) 2
SCC 574 and observed that the Appellate Court could suspend the order of conviction only when the
convict specifically shows the consequences that may follow if the order is not suspended or stayed;
and the present one was not a fit case for suspension of sentence and enlargement of the accused on
bail.
3.4.1. The relevant observations of the High Court in its order dated 03.01.2019 could be noticed as
under2:"1. The accused No. 2 N. Ramamurthy has filed this appeal challenging the judgment
of conviction and order of sentence dated 22.10.2018 passed by learned XLVI
Additional City Civil and Session Judge and Special Judge for CBI cases, Bengaluru
in Special Criminal Case No. 12/2002, wherein the present appellant/accused No. 2
has been convicted for the offence punishable under Section 120-B r/w Sections 420,
409, 468, 471, 477-A of IPC and under Section 13(2) r/w Sections 13(1)(c) and (d) of
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and sentenced accordingly. The Special Court has
ordered separate sentence of imprisonment and fine in each of the offences for which
appellant/accused No. 2 was found guilty. The sentence of imprisonment all put
together comes to 45 years of rigorous imprisonment (for all the proven guilt put
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40293556/

3

N. Ramamurthy vs State By Central Bureau Of ... on 26 April, 2019

together).
**** **** **** 2 Extraction from pp. 1 and 5-7 of the SLP paper-book
14. Considering the said alleged voluntary act of the accused and various other circumstances, the
trial Court appears to have arrived at a conclusion holding that the accused is guilty of the alleged
offences. In view of the said fact that the accused has been found guilty of the offences, more
particularly, of those punishable under Sections 420, 409, 468, 471 and 477A of IPC and also under
Section 13(2) r/w Section 13(1)(c) and (d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, I do not find
that non-examination of the hand writing expert would be a convincing ground for seeking
suspension of sentence of the appellant.
15. The second phase of argument of the learned counsel for the appellant is that the accused being
only a Clerk, had no power to prematurely close the deposits and close the account. A cursory look of
the same, go to show that accused nowhere says that in his capacity as a Clerk he has closed several
accounts. On the contrary, offence alleged against him is forging the signatures of the customers and
making the Bank to credit the deposits proceeds to his account. Thus, the designation of the accused
whether as a Clerk or discharging his working in any other capacity would become immaterial in this
context. As such, the argument of learned counsel for the appellant on that ground is also not
acceptable.
16. Lastly, it is also the contention of the appellant that the accused No. 2/appellant is suffering from
several health related ailment and diseases haemorrhage and is under constant medication.
Admittedly, the age of the appellant/accused No. 2 is said to be 66 years, as such, many age related
ailments are natural to be present in many of the people. It is incorrect to say that because a person
is serving sentence, he is deprived of the proper medical care. As such, the health related grounds
canvassed also is not acceptable.
17. Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Navjot Singh Sidhu vs State of Punjab & Another reported in
(2007) 2 SCC 574 with respect to Section 389 (1) of Cr.P.C and suspension of the order appealed
against, was pleased to observe that, the Appellate Court can suspend the order of conviction only
when the convict specifically shows the consequences that may follow, if the order is not suspended
or stayed. Further, grant of stay of conviction can re resorted to the rare cases depending upon the
special facts of the case (sic).
18. In the case on hand, for the reasons given above, I do not find that it is one such case, which
deserves the suspension of sentence and enlargement of the accused on bail."
(underlining supplied for emphasis) 3.5. Thereafter, the second application seeking suspension of
execution of sentence was moved on behalf of the appellant, being IA No. 1 of 2019, on the ground of
his deteriorating health condition. However this application was also dismissed by the High Court
by order dated 29.01.2019 while essentially relying upon the reasons assigned for declining such
prayer in the previous order dated 03.01.2019. The High Court, however, ordered that the direction
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40293556/

4

N. Ramamurthy vs State By Central Bureau Of ... on 26 April, 2019

of the treating doctor of the appellant may be complied with. In its order dated 29.01.2019, the High
Court again proceeded to observe that the appellant was awarded 45 years of imprisonment in the
following3:"2. The appellant/applicant is a convicted person in the said case for the offences
punishable under Section 120B read with Sections 420, 409, 468, 471, 477A of Indian
Penal Code and under Section 13(2) read with Sections 13(1)(c) and (d) of Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988, (hereinafter for brevity referred to as 'P.C.Act'). He was
sentenced accordingly by the Special Court. The Special Court has ordered separate
sentence of imprisonment and fine for each of the offences for which the appellant
was found guilty. The sentence of imprisonment all put together comes to 45 years of
rigorous imprisonment (for all the proven guilt put together)."
(underlining supplied for emphasis)
4. Assailing the orders aforesaid, the learned counsel for the appellant has
strenuously argued that the High Court has approached the case from an altogether
wrong angle while observing that the appellant has been awarded 3 Extraction from
p. 8 of the SLP paper-book 45 years of imprisonment though the sentences were
ordered to run concurrently by the Trial Court and hence, the maximum period of
imprisonment is 7 years apart from certain default stipulations, which would come in
operation only if the fine is not paid. The learned counsel has further argued that the
reference to the decision in Navjot Singh Sidhu (supra), was also misplaced because
the appellant herein had only prayed for suspension of sentence and not for
suspension of his conviction. According to the learned counsel, the prayer for
suspension of sentence should be considered liberally and suspension ought not be
denied unless there are exceptional circumstances; and there being no such
exceptional reasons or circumstances in the present case, the prayer for suspension
deserves to be granted. Per contra, the orders impugned are duly supported on behalf
of the respondent with reference to the findings recorded against the appellant by the
Trial Court.
5. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and on perusal of the record, we are inclined to allow
these appeals and while setting aside the orders impugned, restore the applications seeking
suspension of execution of sentence under Section 389 CrPC for consideration afresh by the High
Court.
6. We feel it imperative to restore the applications for consideration afresh for the fundamental
reason that the approach of the High Court in dealing with the applications made on behalf of the
appellant under Section 389 CrPC had apparently been from a wrong angle and on two major
misconceptions: One, that the High Court assumed as if the sentences awarded to the appellant for
different offences are to run consecutively i.e., one after another and, while taking sum total of the
sentences so awarded, the High Court has proceeded as if the accused appellant has been ordered to
undergo imprisonment for a whopping 45 years. No great deal of discussion is required to say that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40293556/

5

N. Ramamurthy vs State By Central Bureau Of ... on 26 April, 2019

such an assumption by the High Court had been fundamentally incorrect and the High Court,
obviously, omitted to notice that the Trial Court had specifically ordered that all the sentences shall
run concurrently. Secondly, the High Court has proceeded to refer to the principles governing the
consideration of the prayer for suspension of the operation of the order of conviction, although the
prayer in the present matter had only been for suspension of execution of sentence.
7. It is not far to seek that when the High Court assumed that the appellant is to serve 45 years in
prison, its consideration of the prayer for suspension of execution of sentence took entirely different
dimensions. The applications ought to have been considered while keeping in view the fact that with
concurrent running of sentences, the maximum period for imprisonment envisaged by the order of
the Trial Court is 7 years. Of course, there are default stipulations in the order of the Trial Court but
in any case, and by any method of calculation, it cannot be said that the appellant has been ordered
to serve out 45 years in prison. The length of imprisonment to be served under an impugned order
of sentencing has obvious bearing on the consideration of the prayer for suspension of execution of
sentence during the pendency of an appeal or revision; and when there had been fundamental error
as regards such an over-bearing factor, the prayer of the appellant requires reconsideration after
removal of this error.
8. In both the orders impugned, the High Court, apart from the aforesaid error about the length of
imprisonment to be served by the appellant, has also proceeded on entirely irrelevant consideration
with reference to the principles related with the prayer for suspension of the operation of the order
of conviction that such a suspension could be granted only in rare and exceptional cases and for
special reason. With respect, the High Court appears to have missed out the fact that the prayer on
behalf of the appellant had only been for suspension of execution of sentence and not for stay or
suspension of the operation of the order of conviction. Hence, reference to the decision in Navjot
Singh Siddhu (supra) had been obviously inapt on the facts and in the circumstances of the present
case. In fact, in the other cited decision in K.C. Sareen v. CBI, Chandigarh: (2001) 6 SCC 584, this
Court has indicated that ordinarily, the superior Court should suspend the sentence of
imprisonment in the matters relating to the offence under the PC Act, unless the appeal could be
heard soon after filing. This Court pointed out the subtle distinction in the proposition for
suspension of an order of conviction on one hand and that for suspension of sentence on the other.
This Court explained and laid down as under:
11. The legal position, therefore, is this: though the power to suspend an order of
conviction, apart from the order of sentence, is not alien to Section 389(1) of the
Code, its exercise should be limited to very exceptional cases. Merely because the
convicted person files an appeal in challenge of the conviction the court should not
suspend the operation of the order of conviction. The court has a duty to look at all
aspects including the ramifications of keeping such conviction in abeyance. It is in
the light of the above legal position that we have to examine the question as to what
should be the position when a public servant is convicted of an offence under the PC
Act. No doubt when the appellate court admits the appeal filed in challenge of the
conviction and sentence for the offence under the PC Act, the superior court should
normally suspend the sentence of imprisonment until disposal of the appeal, because
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40293556/

6

N. Ramamurthy vs State By Central Bureau Of ... on 26 April, 2019

refusal thereof would render the very appeal otiose unless such appeal could be heard
soon after the filing of the appeal. But suspension of conviction of the offence under
the PC Act, dehors the sentence of imprisonment as a sequel thereto, is a different
matter. 8.1. What we find from the impugned order dated 29.01.2019 is that, even
after taking note of the principles aforesaid, the High Court has apparently missed
out the substratum and has not applied the applicable legal principles to the case at
hand.
9. We are not elaborating on the other grounds urged on behalf of the appellant for suspension of
execution of substantive sentence of imprisonment, essentially for the reason that this prayer under
Section 389 CrPC is to be adequately examined and considered by the High Court with reference to
the record and all the surrounding factors; and, in the present case, when consideration of such a
prayer is found vitiated for an erroneous approach, we are of the view that the High Court need to
consider the prayer afresh.
10. It goes without saying that we have neither pronounced on the merits of the applications moved
on behalf of the appellant seeking suspension of execution of sentence nor have made any
observations relating to the merits of the appeal pending in the High Court and the entire matter is
left open for consideration of the High Court in accordance with law.
11. Accordingly and in view of the above, these appeals are allowed to the extent and in the manner
that the impugned orders dated 03.01.2019 and 29.01.2019 passed respectively in disposal of IA No.
1 of 2018 and IA No. 1 of 2019 in Criminal Appeal No. 2000 of 2018 by the High Court of Karnataka
are set aside; and the said IA Nos. 1 of 2018 and 1 of 2019 are restored for consideration afresh. The
matter being related with the prayer for suspension of execution of sentence during the pendency of
appeal, we would request the High Court to take up and dispose of the said applications
expeditiously, preferably within two weeks from today.
.............................................J. (ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE) ............................................J. (DINESH
MAHESHWARI) 1 New Delhi, Date: 26th April, 2019.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40293556/

7

