for educational use only
Anand Ramachandra Chougule vs Sidarai Laxman Chougala on 6 August, 2019

Supreme Court of India
Anand Ramachandra Chougule vs Sidarai Laxman Chougala on 6 August, 2019
Author: Navin Sinha
Bench: Navin Sinha, Hon'Ble Ms. Banerjee
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). 1006 OF 2010
ANAND RAMACHANDRA CHOUGULE
...APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
SIDARAI LAXMAN CHOUGALA
AND OTHERS
...RESPONDENT(S)
WITH
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). 1007 OF 2010
STATE OF KARNATAKA
...APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
SIDARAI LAXMAN CHOUGALA
AND OTHERS
...RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

NAVIN SINHA, J.
The present two appeals have been preferred by the complainant and the State respectively. The
challenge is to the orders of the High Court, by which the respondents nos.3 and 4 have been
acquitted, and the conviction of the respondents nos.1 and 2 to life imprisonment under Section
302/34 of the Indian Penal Code,1860 (hereinafter referred to as IPC) has been altered to one under
Section 304 Part I/34 Signature Not Verified Digitally signed by GULSHAN KUMAR ARORA Date:
2019.08.06 sentencing them to seven years.
16:35:44 IST Reason:
2. The complainant and the accused are related to each other. There was a land dispute between
them. A civil suit is also stated to have been pending. On 07.06.2002, the deceased along with
others were returning to their village. When they reached near the house of one Yeellappa Patil, the
accused persons are alleged to have assaulted them leading to homicidal death. The trial court
convicted all the four accused. The High Court in appeal concluded from the materials on record
that the assault was made on the spur of the moment without premeditation and that both sides
having suffered injuries the conviction ought to be altered under Section 304 Part I, IPC. Two of the
accused were acquitted as their presence was found to be doubtful.
3. Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the High Court erred in altering the conviction
to one under Section 304 Part I, IPC. The assault was premeditated. The accused were armed with
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8337733/

1

Anand Ramachandra Chougule vs Sidarai Laxman Chougala on 6 August, 2019

axe, koita and bamboo sticks. PWs. 2 and 3 were injured witnesses. There was no material in
support of the plea of self defence or that the assault took place on the spur of the moment. No such
defence was taken under Section 313, Cr.P.C. by the accused. PWs. 4 and 5 were also eye witnesses.
Minor contradictions and discrepancies in the evidence of the prosecution witnesses were
insufficient to doubt the prosecution case. Relying upon State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Faqirey , (2019) 5
SCC 605, it was submitted that the conviction ought to be restored to one under Section 302, IPC.
4. Reliance was also placed on Pulicherla Nagaraju vs. State of A.P., (2006) 11 SCC 444, and State of
Rajasthan thr. the Secretary vs. Kanhaiya Lal, (2019) 5 SCC 639, in support of the submission that a
single assault on the head sufficient to cause death, without provocation in a sudden quarrel or fight
justified conviction under Section 302, IPC. Reliance was further placed on Vijay Ramkrishan
Gaikwad vs. State of Maharashtra and another, (2012) 11 SCC 592, to submit that even if this Court
were to uphold the conviction under Section 304 Part I, IPC, the sentence ought to be enhanced to
ten years.
5. Relying on Raj Kumar vs. State of Maharashtra, (2009) 15 SCC 292, it has been submitted that if
the accused took a plea of self defence, burden was on them under Section 105 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 to demonstrate that their case would come under any of the general exceptions
under the IPC.
6. If the First Information Report lodged by the accused with regard to the same incident was not
exhibited by the prosecution or evidence with regard to hospitalization and injury reports of the
accused were also not placed, relying on Dayal Singh and others vs. State of Uttaranchal, (2012) 8
SCC 263 and Gajoo vs. State of Uttarakhand , (2012) 9 SCC 532 it was submitted that at best it may
be a case of defective investigation which cannot dent the credibility of the prosecution case with
regard to the premediated murderous assault with a common intention.
7. Learned counsel for the respondents-accused submitted that there was no premediated attack.
The parties being related, and the existence of a land dispute between them, when they met near the
house of Yellappa Patil a verbal duel ensued followed by a scuffle in which both sides received
injuries. The F.I.R. lodged by the respondents, their admission to the Hospital for treatment and
injury reports have all been suppressed by the prosecution. The fact that the defence may not have
been taken under Section 313, Cr.P.C. was inconsequential as the prosecution had to prove the
charge beyond all reasonable doubt. Reliance was placed on Manoj Kumar vs. State of Himachal
Pradesh , (2018) 7 SCC 327, to submit that in absence of a premediated plan to attack, a sudden
quarrel in the background of civil dispute with regard to land pending between the parties, the order
of the High Court calls for no interference.
8. We have considered the respective submissions and perused the materials on record. The
relationship between parties and the existence of a land dispute regarding which a civil suit was also
pending are undisputed facts. The fact that a verbal duel followed by scuffle took place between the
parties culminating in injuries is a concurrent finding of fact by two Courts. The fact that the
accused also lodged an F.I.R. with regard to the same occurrence stands established by the evidence
of PWs. 19 and 22, the Investigating Officers, who have admitted that the respondents-accused had
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8337733/

2

Anand Ramachandra Chougule vs Sidarai Laxman Chougala on 6 August, 2019

also lodged BRPS Cr. No.79/02 marked Exhibit D-10, which was not investigated by them.
Similarly, PW 11, the Police Constable, deposed that two of the accused were admitted in the District
Hospital, Belgaum and that he was posted on watch duty. The occurrence is of 07.06.2002 and
respondents-accused nos. 1 and 2 were discharged on 11.06.2002. Their injury report has not been
brought on record by the prosecution and no explanation has been furnished in that regard.
9. The burden lies on the prosecution to prove the allegations beyond all reasonable doubt. In
contradistinction to the same, the accused has only to create a doubt about the prosecution case and
the probability of its defence. An accused is not required to establish or prove his defence beyond all
reasonable doubt, unlike the prosecution. If the accused takes a defence, which is not improbable
and appears likely, there is material in support of such defence, the accused is not required to prove
anything further. The benefit of doubt must follow unless the prosecution is able to prove its case
beyond all reasonable doubt.
10. The fact that a defence may not have been taken by an accused under Section 313, Cr.P.C. again
cannot absolve the prosecution from proving its case beyond all reasonable doubt. If there are
materials which the prosecution is unable to answer, the weakness in the defence taken cannot
become the strength of the prosecution to claim that in the circumstances it was not required to
prove anything. In Sunil Kundu v. State of Jharkhand , (2013) 4 SCC 422, this Court observed:
28When the prosecution is not able to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt it
cannot take advantage of the fact that the accused have not been able to probabilise
their defence. It is well settled that the prosecution must stand or fall on its own feet.
It cannot draw support from the weakness of the case of the accused, if it has not
proved its case beyond reasonable doubt.
11. The fact that an F.I.R. was lodged by the accused with regard to the same occurrence, the failure
of the police to explain why it was not investigated, coupled with the admitted fact that the accused
were also admitted in the hospital for treatment with regard to injuries sustained in the same
occurrence, but the injury report was not brought on record and suppressed by the prosecution,
creates sufficient doubts which the prosecution has been unable to answer.
12. We find it difficult to concur with the submission on behalf of the appellants that the failure of
the prosecution to investigate the F.I.R. lodged by the accused with regard to the same occurrence or
to place their injury reports on record was merely a defective investigation. We are of the considered
opinion that the failure of the prosecution to act fairly and place all relevant materials with regard to
the occurrence before the court enabling it to take just and fair decision has caused serious prejudice
to them. A fair criminal trial encompasses a fair investigation at the pre-trial stage, a fair trial where
the prosecution does not conceal anything from the court and discharges its obligations in
accordance with law impartially to facilitate a just and proper decision by the court in the larger
interest of justice concluding with a fairness in sentencing also. The observations in Dayal Singh
(supra) are pertinent as follows:

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8337733/

3

Anand Ramachandra Chougule vs Sidarai Laxman Chougala on 6 August, 2019

22. Even the present case is a glaring example of irresponsible investigation. It, in
fact, smacks of intentional mischief to misdirect the investigation as well as to
withhold material evidence from the court. It cannot be considered a case of bona
fide or unintentional omission or commission. It is not a case of faulty investigation
simpliciter but is an investigation coloured with motivation or an attempt to ensure
that the suspect can go scot- free
13. The contention with regard to burden of proof on the defence under Section 105, Indian
Evidence Act,1872 is best answered by Partap vs. State of U.P., (1976) 2 SCC 798, observing as
follows:
14. We have carefully scrutinised the judgments of the courts below. In our opinion,
their finding in regard to the plea of self-defence is clearly erroneous. They appear to
have overlooked the distinction between the nature of burden that rests on an
accused under Section 105 of the Evidence Act to establish a plea of self-defence and
the one cast on the prosecution by Section 101 to prove its case. It is well settled that
the burden on the accused is not as onerous as that which lies on the prosecution.
While the prosecution is required to prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt, the
accused can discharge his onus by establishing a mere preponderance of probability.
14. Dayal Singh (supra) is distinguishable on its own facts as it did not relate to suppression of
materials with regard to the accused during the trial in addition to the failure to investigate. A
defective investigation shall be completely different from no investigation at all coupled with
suppression of the injury report arising out of another F.I.R with regard to the same occurrence.
15. Gazoo (supra) is also distinguishable on its facts as it related only to failure in obtaining the
serologist report.
16. We also cannot find fault with the acquittal of accused nos.3 and 4 by the High Court giving them
the benefit of doubt after consideration of the evidence of P.W. 5 vis-à-vis that of P.Ws. 2 and 3.
17. We, therefore, find no reason to interfere with the order of the High Court. The appeals are
dismissed.
...................J.
[ASHOK BHUSHAN] ...................J.
[NAVIN SINHA] NEW DELHI AUGUST 06, 2019.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8337733/

4

