for educational use only
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1204 OF 2020
(Arising from SLP(C) No. 36253/2014)
Vundavalli Ratna Manikyam & another

…Appellants

Versus
V.P.P.R.N. Prasada Rao

…Respondent

JUDGMENT

M.R. SHAH, J.
Leave granted.
2.

Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned common judgment

and order dated 25.07.2014 passed by the High Court of Judicature at
Hyderabad for the State of Telangana and for the State of Andhra Pradesh in
Appeal Suit No. 3511 of 1992, whereby the High Court has allowed the said
appeal suit filed by the respondent herein – original plaintiff and has quashed
and set aside the judgment and decree passed by the learned trial Court in O.S.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
JAYANT KUMAR ARORA
Date: 2020.02.07
18:26:14 IST
Reason:

No. 55 of 1986 dismissing the suit and consequently decreeing the suit of the
respondent herein – original plaintiff for specific performance of the agreement
1

to sell dated 7.5.1981, the original defendants in O.S. No. 55 of 1986 have
preferred the present appeal.
3.

The facts leading to the present appeal in nutshell are as under:
That one Nimmalapudi Ramaswami – husband of original defendant no.1

was the original owner of the suit land. That the said Nimmalapudi Ramaswami
agreed to sell the suit land by executing agreement to sell dated 7.5.1981 in
favour of the original plaintiff for a sale consideration of Rs.59,200/-. He
received an advance sale consideration of Rs.26,500/- on the same day. As per
the agreement to sell, the balance sale consideration was required to be paid
within four months. However, the time was extended making endorsement on
the reverse of the original agreement to sell for another period of eight months.
But during the extended period, the State Government initiated land acquisition
proceedings for acquiring the suit property.

The original land owner –

Nimmalapudi Ramaswami and the plaintiff made a representation for deleting
the suit property from the proposed land acquisition. At this stage, it is required
to be noted that in the representation made to the Assistant Collector, the
original land owner categorically admitted that he has sold the suit land to the
plaintiff for consideration and delivered possession of the land to the plaintiff.
The plaintiff also stated in the said representation that he has purchased the
property under the agreement to sell and has taken possession of the property in
question. That thereafter the State Government issued notification under Section
4 of the Land Acquisition Act, vide notification dated 21.09.1981.
2

3.1

The said notification came to be challenged by the plaintiff and another

by filing Writ Petition No. 3161 of 1983. The said writ petition came to be
allowed and the notification came to be set aside by judgment and order dated
22.11.1984. Appeal against the judgment of the High Court came to be
dismissed by the Division Bench vide order dated 4.2.1985. After the death of
the original land owner – Nimmalapudi Ramaswami, the original defendant
no.1 – wife of Nimmalapudi Ramaswami executed a sale deed in favour of
original defendant no.2 – Bogilla Satyanarayana Murthy. Apprehending that the
wife of late Nimmalapudi Ramaswami – original defendant no.1 –
Nimmalapudi Veeramma and the said Bogilla Satyanarayana Murthy may
interfere with his possession, the original plaintiff – respondent herein filed O.S.
No. 24 of 1984 in the Court of District Munsiff Court, Ramachandrapuram
against the aforesaid two for permanent injunction and obtained a temporary
injunction. The aforesaid suit was subsequently transferred to the District
Munsif Court, Alamuru which was registered as O.S. No. 188/1984 and later the
said suit was transferred to the Subordinate Judge, Ramachandrapuram and
registered as O.S. No. 94/1989 claiming permanent injunction restraining
Bogilla Satyanarayana Murthy and his men from interfering with his
possession.
3.2

That thereafter the plaintiff got issued a legal notice dated 20.01.1986 to

original defendant no.1 – widow of late Nimmalapudi Ramaswami and Bogilla
Satyanarayana Murthy claiming specific performance of the agreement to sell
3

dated 7.5.1981. Original defendant no.1 – Nimmalapudi Veeramma replied to
the aforesaid notice vide reply notice dated 31.1.1986 contending that she has
already sold the property to Bogilla Satyanarayana Murthy for a valuable
consideration and consequently refused to execute the sale deed. Therefore, the
respondent herein – original plaintiff filed O.S. No. 55/1986 on the file of
Subordinate Judge, Ramachandrapuram against the appellants herein – original
defendants on 23.4.1986 for specific performance of the agreement to sell dated
7.5.1981. Alternatively, the plaintiff prayed to refund the advance amount of
Rs.26,500/- together with interest @ 18% per annum and award of damages of
Rs.25,000/-.
3.3

That the said suit was resisted by original defendant no.1 – Nimmalapudi

Veeramma by filing the written statement contending that after the death of her
husband Nimmalapudi Ramaswami she was put in possession of the schedule
property and she executed an agreement to sell dated 16.2.1983 and sold the suit
property for Rs.20,000/- and received an advance of Rs.2,000/- and thereafter
executed a registered sale deed dated 8.7.1983 in favour of defendant no.2 –
Bogilla Satyanarayana Murthy and delivered possession to him on 10.05.1983.
It was also contended that the alleged agreement to sell dated 7.5.1981 is not
true and valid and it is a collusive agreement brought into existence by
Nimmalapudi Ramaswami in anticipation of the land acquisition proceedings.
Original defendant no.1 prayed to dismiss the suit filed by the plaintiff.

4

3.4

Original defendant no.2 – Bogilla Satyanarayana Murthy also filed the

written statement in O.S. No. 55/1986. It was the case on behalf of original
defendant no.2 that he is a bonafide purchaser for a valid consideration and he is
in possession and enjoyment of the same by executing the sale deed in his
favour executed by the wife of late Nimmalapudi Ramaswami.
3.5

That both the aforesaid suits being O.S. No. 55/1986 (suit for specific

performance) and O.S. No. 94/1989 (suit for permanent injunction) were
consolidated and heard together.

In both the suits, the learned trial Court

framed the issues. That both the plaintiffs and the defendants led the evidence,
both oral as well as documentary. That on appreciation of evidence on record,
the learned trial Court believed the execution of agreement to sell dated
7.5.1981 in favour of the plaintiff. The learned trial Court also believed the
possession of the plaintiff at the time of filing of the suit. However, the learned
trial Court denied the specific performance of the agreement to sell dated
7.5.1981 only on the ground that the claim for specific performance is barred by
limitation.
3.6

The learned trial Court decreed O.S. No. 94/1989 and granted permanent

injunction restraining the appellants – original defendants to interfere with the
peaceful possession and enjoyment of the property in question having found
that the plaintiff is in possession and enjoyment of the property.
3.7

Aggrieved by the common judgment and decree passed by the learned

trial Court passed in O.S. No. 55 of 1986 in dismissing the suit for specific
5

performance of the agreement to sell dated 7.5.1981, the original plaintiff filed
Appeal Suit No. 3511/1992 before the High Court. The original defendants in
O.S. No. 55/1986 also filed Tr.A.S. No. 439/2006 challenging the adverse
findings on issue nos. 1 to 5 in O.S. No. 55/1986, i.e., believing the agreement
to sell in favour of the plaintiff and believing the possession of the plaintiff
under the agreement to sell dated 7.5.1981. At this stage, it is required to be
noted that the learned trial Court dismissed the suit on the ground of limitation
considering Article 54 of the Limitation Act. However, it was the specific case
on behalf of the plaintiff that Article 113 of the Limitation Act would be
applicable and therefore the suit is within the period of limitation.
3.8

That by the impugned common judgment and order, the High Court has

allowed the appeal suit no. 3511/1992 preferred by the original plaintiff and has
quashed and set aside the judgment and decree passed by the learned trial Court
dismissing the suit for specific performance and consequently has decreed the
suit for specific performance applying Article 113 of the Limitation Act. By the
impugned common judgment and order the High Court has also dismissed
Tr.A.S. No. 439/2006 and Tr.A.S. No. 962/2013 preferred by the original
defendants confirming the findings on issue nos. 1 to 5 in O.S. No. 55/1986 and
also confirming the judgment and decree of permanent injunction in O.S. No.
94/1989.
3.9

Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned common judgment

and order passed by the High Court, the original defendants have preferred the
6

present appeal. It is required to be noted that what is challenged in the present
appeal is the judgment and order passed by the High Court in A.S. No.
3511/1992 only, vide which the High Court has allowed the said appeal
preferred by the original plaintiff and consequently has decreed the suit for
specific performance of agreement to sell dated 7.5.1981 in favour of the
original plaintiff.
4.

Learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellants – original

defendants has vehemently submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the
case the High Court has materially erred in quashing and setting aside the
judgment and decree passed by the learned trial Court dismissing the suit on the
ground of limitation.
4.1

It is further submitted by the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the

appellants – original defendants that the High Court has materially erred in not
properly appreciating the fact that the learned trial Court rightly dismissed the
suit on the ground of limitation applying Article 54 of the Limitation Act. It is
submitted that, in the facts and circumstances of the case, Article 113 of the
Limitation Act shall not be applicable.
4.2

It is further submitted by the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the

appellants – original defendants that as per the original agreement to sell dated
7.5.1981 the sale deed was required to be executed within four months from the
date of execution of the agreement to sell and even the same was extended up to
6.5.1982 only. It is submitted that therefore the limitation for filing the suit by
7

the plaintiff would be three years from 6.5.1982 as provided under Article 54 of
the Limitation Act. It is submitted therefore as rightly held by the learned trial
Court the suit of the plaintiff was barred under Article 54 of the Limitation Act.
4.3

It is further submitted by the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the

appellants – original defendants that the High Court ought to have seen that
taking a stray sentence in Ex.A1 (agreement to sell) that vendor has to settle all
the disputes in the property cannot be termed as implied covenant.
4.4

It is further submitted by the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the

appellants – original defendants that the High Court ought to have appreciated
that there has been a valid sale by the widow of the vendor in favour of
appellant no.2 herein – Bogilla Satyanarayana Murthy and the said sale deed
was acted upon by the widow and as she was in possession, she put appellant
no.2 herein into possession of the suit property.
4.5

It is further submitted by the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the

appellants – original defendants that the High Court ought to have appreciated
that till notice dated 20.1.1986 was served upon appellant no.2 – original
defendant no.2, appellant no.2 was not aware of the alleged agreement to sell
dated 7.5.1981 in favour of the plaintiff. It is submitted that appellant no.2
herein – original defendant no.2 is a purchaser without notice of the existence of
the earlier agreement and on payment of full sale consideration. It is submitted
that therefore the High Court has materially erred in allowing the appeal and
decreeing the suit for specific performance in favour of the plaintiff.
8

4.6

Making the above submissions, it is prayed to allow the present appeal.

5.

The present appeal is vehemently opposed by Mrs. K. Sarada Devi,

learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the original plaintiff – respondent
herein.
5.1

It is submitted by the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the

respondent herein - original plaintiff that in the facts and circumstances of the
case, the High Court has not committed any error in decreeing the suit relying
upon and applying Article 113 of the Limitation Act.
5.2

It is further submitted by the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the

respondent herein - original plaintiff that so far as the execution of agreement
to sell dated 7.5.1981 by original land owner – Nimmalapudi Ramaswami and
that the plaintiff was put in possession there are concurrent findings of fact by
the learned trial Court as well as the High Court, which are on appreciation of
evidence on record.
5.3

It is further submitted by the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the

respondent herein - original plaintiff that after the execution of the agreement to
sell dated 7.5.1981 and after the time to make the payment and execution of the
sale deed was extended by a further period of eight months, the land acquisition
proceedings were initiated and it was the plaintiff who challenged the
acquisition proceedings and in the petition filed by him the acquisition
proceedings came to be set aside and the writ petition was allowed. It is
submitted that as mentioned in the agreement to sell – Ex. A1 it was for the
9

vendor to settle all the disputes in the property. It is submitted that after the
land acquisition proceedings came to be quashed by the High Court and
thereafter when the plaintiff served a notice upon the defendants to execute the
sale deed and thereafter there was a denial by original defendant no.s 1 & 2
thereafter the suit has been filed within a period of three years. It is submitted
that therefore Article 113 of the Limitation Act would be applicable and the
same is rightly applied by the High Court.
5.4

It is further submitted by the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the

respondent herein - original plaintiff that even and as observed by the High
Court in the impugned common judgment and order, the execution of the
agreement to sell dated 7.5.1981 has not been disputed by the defendants. It is
submitted that however it was their defence that the said agreement to sell was
to defeat the land acquisition proceedings. It is submitted that therefore when
the agreement to sell dated 7.5.1981 has been admitted by the defendants and
the plaintiff was always ready and willing to perform his part of the contract and
all throughout it was the plaintiff who challenged the acquisition proceedings
which shows the bonafides on the part of the plaintiff, the High Court has
rightly allowed the appeal and consequently has rightly decreed the suit for
specific performance of the agreement to sell dated 7.5.1981.
5.5

It is further submitted by the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the

respondent herein - original plaintiff that as such there is no appeal preferred by
the defendants challenging the impugned common judgment and order passed
10

by the High Court insofar as dismissing their appeals being Tr.A.S. No.
439/2006 and Tr.A.S. No. 962/2013 by which the High Court specifically
confirmed the findings on issue nos. 1 to 5 in O.S. No. 55/1986 and also
confirmed the judgment and decree of permanent injunction in favour of the
plaintiff in O.S. No. 94/1989.
5.6

It is further submitted by the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the

respondent herein - original plaintiff that as such the plaintiff is in possession of
the suit property since 1981 and therefore also the present appeal is required to
be dismissed.
5.7

It is further submitted by the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the

respondent herein - original plaintiff that even otherwise and with a view to put
an end to the litigation the plaintiff is ready and willing to pay some more
amount than what is required to be paid under the agreement to sell.
5.8

Making the above submissions, it is prayed to dismiss the present appeal.

6.

In reply, learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellants –

original defendants has submitted that if the impugned judgment and order
passed by the High Court is set aside and the property/land in question is
reverted back to the appellants -, the appellants are ready and willing to pay a
handsome amount to the plaintiff.
7.

We have heard the learned counsel for the respective parties at length and

perused and considered the impugned common judgment and order passed by

11

the High Court as well as the judgment and decree passed by the learned trial
Court.
7.1

At the outset, it is required to be noted that the original plaintiff instituted

the suit for specific performance of agreement to sell dated 7.5.1981 (Ex.A1). It
is not in dispute that under the agreement to sell dated 7.5.1981, the sale deed
was to be executed within a period of four months from the date of execution of
agreement to sell i.e. 7.5.1981. However, thereafter time was extended by a
further period of eight months i.e. up to 6.5.1982. However, before any further
steps could be taken by the plaintiff and the original vendor, the suit property
was subjected to the acquisition by the State Government. It was the plaintiff
who made a representation to the Assistant Collector and requested for deletion
of the property from the acquisition. A similar representation was made by the
original vendor also. It is required to be noted that in the representations both
the vendor and the vendee specifically stated that the land in question has been
sold in favour of the plaintiff and that he is in possession. Therefore, the
original vendor as such admitted the execution of the agreement to sell dated
7.5.1981 as well as handing over the possession of the suit property to the
plaintiff.

Therefore, the learned trial Court as such rightly believed the

execution of the agreement to sell dated 7.5.1981 as well as handing over of
possession to the plaintiff. The same is rightly confirmed by the High Court.
7.2

However, the trial Court dismissed the suit solely on the ground that the

suit for specific performance was barred by limitation applying Article 54 of the
12

Limitation Act. On the other hand, it was the specific case on behalf of the
plaintiff that in the facts and circumstances of the case Article 113 of the
Limitation Act shall be applicable as the suit was filed within a period of three
years when the right to sue accrued. According to the plaintiff, the right to sue
accrued when the plaintiff served a notice upon the defendants to execute the
sale deed and the defendants refused to execute the sale deed. At this stage, it is
required to be noted that under the agreement to sell it was for the vendor to
settle all the disputes in the property. As the land in question was subjected to
the acquisition and thereafter the acquisition proceedings came to be quashed
and set aside at the instance of the plaintiff in the year 1984/1985 and thereafter
the plaintiff served a legal notice upon the defendants on 20.01.1986 calling
upon the defendants to execute the sale deed which came to be refused by reply
notice dated 31.1.1986 and thereafter the suit for specific performance was
preferred, as rightly observed by the High Court, Article 113 of the Limitation
Act would be applicable and not Article 54 of the Limitation Act as applied by
the learned trial Court. We are in complete agreement with the view taken by
the High Court in applying Article 113 of the Limitation Act. As observed
hereinabove, the learned trial Court dismissed the suit solely on the ground that
the suit is barred by limitation considering Article 54 of the Limitation Act
though all other findings with respect to the execution of agreement to sell., the
plaintiff was put in possession etc. were held to be in favour of the plaintiff.

13

7.3

Therefore applying Article 113 of the Limitation Act to the facts of the

case on hand and the conduct of the plaintiff all throughout to protect not only
his possession but to protect the property from acquisition and that he was
always ready and willing to perform his part of the agreement to sell/contract,
the High Court has rightly decreed the suit for specific performance. We are in
complete agreement with the view taken by the High Court.
7.4

However, at the same time, considering the fact that the agreement to sell

was executed in the year 1981 for a total sale consideration of Rs.59,200/- and
at the relevant time Rs.26,500/- was paid as an earnest money and all
throughout the plaintiff enjoyed the possession and thereafter by now about 40
years have passed and as agreed by the plaintiff to pay some more amount to
the defendants, over and above the sale consideration as mentioned in the
agreement to sell, which he has agreed to pay to put an end to the litigation and
to buy peace, while dismissing the present appeal, we direct that the plaintiff
shall pay a total sum of Rs.15,00,000/- (Rupees fifteen lakhs only) to the
defendants towards the full sale consideration, which shall be inclusive of the
balance amount of sale consideration to be paid to the defendants under the
agreement to sell, to be paid within a period of eight weeks from today. On
payment of the aforesaid amount of Rs.15,00,000/- (Rupees fifteen lakhs only)
to the original defendants by the original plaintiff, immediately thereafter the
original defendants are directed to execute the sale deed in favour of the
plaintiff.
14

8.

With the aforesaid observations and directions, the present appeal stands

disposed of, however, no order as to costs.
……………………………….J.
[ARUN MISHRA]
……………………………….J.
[VINEET SARAN]
NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 06, 2020

……………………………..J.
[M.R. SHAH]

15

