for educational use only
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6319 OF 2009

PATRAM

…APPELLANT(S)
Versus

GRAM PANCHAYAT KATWAR & ORS.

…RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT

Deepak Gupta, J.

The short question involved in this case is whether the land
in occupation of the appellant(s) is ‘shamilat deh’ land within the
meaning of the Punjab Village Common Lands (Regulation) Act,
1961 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’) and vests in the village
common body. The land in question is situated in Haryana and,
therefore, for the purpose of this judgment we shall be referring
to the Act as amended and applicable to the State of Haryana.
1

2.

The contention of the appellant(s) is that the land in dispute

though ‘shamilat’ land, is actually a patti in possession of the
appellant(s) and his ancestors for more than a century and is not
being used for the common purposes of the village and, therefore,
does not fall within the definition of ‘shamilat deh’ land.
3.

In India, land is said to be the true basis for the unity in a

village, supplying the ultimate bond between the residents of the
village who collectively are known as the village community.
When settlers went to new areas and cleared forests or turned
barren lands into cultivable lands, certain portions of the land
were left for common use such as charand land used for grazing,
lands used for wells, watercourses, land used for common
purposes and also for extension of the village residential area
normally known as the abadi. These lands which were reserved
for common purposes were jealously guarded and were in
essence the common property of the original settlers and those
who had helped them after clearing the waste and bringing the
land under cultivation. The following observations from Chapter
X,

which

has

the

heading

‘The

Village

Common

Land

Introduction’ of Sir W.H. Rattigan’s ‘A Digest on Civil Law for the

2

Punjab’, which is the one of the finest treaties on customary law
of Punjab, are relevant:
“….Lands so reserved are jealously guarded as the
common property of the original body of settlers who
founded the village or of their descendants, and
occasionally also those who assisted the settlers in
clearing the waste and bringing it under cultivation
are recognized as having a share in these reserved
plots. Even in villages which have adopted separate
ownership as to the cultivated areas, some such
plots are usually reserved as village common, and in
pattidari village. It is not unusual to find certain
portions of the waste reserved for the common use of
the proprietors of each patti, and other portions for
common village purposes, the former is designated
shamilat­patti and the latter shamilat­deh.”

4.

Over period of time, the cultivable areas were separated

amongst the different owners and in view of the caste system
which was then extensively prevalent, separate areas in the
village or in different hamlets were provided for different
communities based not only on caste or religion but sometimes
on professions also. To give an example, the weavers would be
put in one area, the potters in another area etc.

Each such

division was called a patti.
5.

This brings us to the definition of ‘shamilat deh’ in Section

2(g) of the Act. The relevant portion reads as under:

3

“2. Definitions. – in this Act, unless the context
otherwise requires,­
xxx
xxx
xxx
(g) “shamilat deh” includes­
(1)
land described in the revenue records as
Shamilat deh or Charand excluding abadi
deh;
(2)
shamilat tikkas;
(3)
land described in the revenue records as
shamilat, tarafs, patties, pannas and
tholas and used according to revenue
records for the benefit of the village
community or a part thereof or for
common purposes of the
village;
(4)
xxxx
(4a) xxxx
(5)
xxxx
but does not include land which­
(i)

records;
(v)

of

6.

becomes or has become shamilat deh due
to river action or has been reserved as
shamilat in villages subject to river action
except shamilat deh entered as pasture,
pond or playground in the revenue
xxx
xxx
xxx
is described in the revenue records as
shamilat taraf, pattis, pannas and thola
and not used according to revenue records
for the benefit of the village community
or a part thereof or for common purposes
the village;
xxx
xxx
xxx

The case of the appellant(s) is that for more than a century

he and his ancestors held a patti which has never been used for
the common purpose of the village and has been cultivated by
them. This land has never been used for common village purpose

4

and in terms of Section 2(g) of the Act cannot be included in the
definition of ‘shamilat deh’. The land continues to be shown in
the possession of the appellant(s) or his ancestors in the
Jamabandis from the year 1915­1916 till date.

The earlier

entries in the column of ownership which read as ‘Shamlat Patti
Dhera & Khubi’ were replaced by the entry ‘Panchayat Deh’.
Aggrieved, the appellant(s) approached the Collector, Bhiwani
challenging the change of entry in the column of ownership. The
appellant(s) lost before the Collector, Bhiwani as well as the
Commissioner, Hisar Division. He then filed a writ petition in the
High Court of Punjab and Haryana, which was rejected with the
following reasoning:
“While examining the first contention raised by the
counsel for the petitioner, as has been noticed in the
forgoing paragraph, it is necessary to refer to clause
(3) of Section 2(g) of the Act extracted hereinabove,
which expressly treats “shamlat”, “tarafs”, “pattis”,
“pannas” and “tholas” as separate and distinct,
while describing the nature of the land. Whereas,
the exception under clause (v) of the proviso under
section 2(g) of the Act notices, “shamlat taraf”,
“pattis”, “pannas” and “thola” as falling with the
exception. As per the revenue record of the year
1907­08, the land under reference has been
described as “shamlat patti”. It does not, therefore,
fall within the term “shamlat taraf”, “pattis”,
“pannas” and “thola” as has been incorporated in
the exception because “shamlat patti” is not
excluded under the clause relied upon by the
learned counsel. It is, therefore, not possible for us
to accept that the land under reference falls within
5

Clause (v) of the proviso under section 2(g) of the
Act.”

7.

The aforesaid judgment was delivered on the basis that

whereas in clause (3) of Section 2(g), there is a comma after the
word ‘shamilat’, there is no such comma in sub­clause (v) of
clause (5) of Section 2(g).

We had requested the parties to

provide us the original Gazette notification and the definition as
quoted by us above is in accord with the Gazette notification.
8.

The issue for consideration is whether the word ‘shamilat’

has to be read with taraf, patti, pannas, and tholas or only with
taraf in sub­clause (v) of clause (5) of Section 2(g).

We must

understand what is meant by the terms ‘taraf’, ‘patti’, ‘panna’ and
‘thola’. To understand this distinction, one must also understand
what is ‘shamilat deh’ land. The word ‘shamilat’ basically means
‘held in joint possession and undivided lands which are part and
parcel of a village’. When these lands are held commonly by a
village proprietary body, they are described as ‘shamilat deh’
land.
9.

‘Taraf’, ‘patti’, ‘panna’ and ‘thola’ are different terms but

have a common strain or similarity running through them.
6

These descriptions are of land of a group of villagers based on
clan, caste, sect, area, etc.

In British India, the village was

divided into different pattis/sections based upon caste, religion,
occupation, etc. of the persons residing in the village.

Patti is

described as division of land into separate portions or strips in a
village. These locations are known as pattis. After independence
since the caste system has been constitutionally abolished, these
classifications refer to different hamlets/clusters where villagers
reside in groups irrespective of their caste. This may be true in
law but not in fact, because unfortunately even today, in most
villages, ghettoization continues and the people of different
communities, castes and religions live in their earmarked areas
or pattis.

Patti is basically, therefore, a small division of the

village. The terms ‘taraf’, ‘panna’ and ‘thola’ may be different but
are akin to patti and also deal with community of villagers
residing separately.

Therefore, they have virtually the same

meaning.
10.

If we accept that there is virtually no difference between

‘taraf’, ‘patti’, ‘panna’ and ‘thola’ then the task of interpretation
becomes much easier.

It is also apparent that a patti can

7

normally be created out of the shamilat land only when a group
of people enjoy some portion of the land out of the bigger
common shareholding that is a patti. The definition of ‘shamilat
deh’ in Section 2(g) of the Act includes all lands descried as
‘shamilat deh’ or charand excluding abadi land. In clause (3) of
Section 2(g) there is a comma after the word ‘shamilat’ whereas
such comma is missing in sub­clause (v) of clause (5) of Section
2(g). We are of the view that there seems to be an error rather
than a deliberate non­use of the comma.

We are of this view

because clause (3) provides that land described as ‘shamilat’,
‘tarafs’, ‘patties’ ‘pannas’ and ‘tholas’, are to be treated as
‘shamilat deh’ land only if they are used for the common purpose
of the village. This clearly implies that if the land described as
‘shamilat’, ‘taraf’, ‘patti’, ‘panna’ and ‘thola’ were not being used
for the common purpose, it would not fall within the meaning of
‘shamilat deh’.
11.

Clause (v) is the negative portion of the definition which

provides that certain lands will not be treated as ‘shamilat deh’
and these are those land which have described as ‘shamilat’,
‘taraf’, ‘patti’, ‘panna’ and ‘thola’ in the revenue record and not
8

used according to the revenue record for the benefit of the village
community or a part thereof or for the common purpose of the
village.

In our view, the absence of the comma after the word

‘shamilat’ is not of any great significance. In fact, it appears that
the comma has been left out by mistake. We may also note that
we find that in various publications, there is a comma between
the words ‘shamilat’ and ‘taraf’. However, there is no comma in
the official publication in the Gazette notification.

Keeping in

view, what we have held above, it appears to us that the absence
of a comma is a mistake and in fact according to us, a comma
should be read after ‘shamilat’ and before ‘taraf’ in the latter part
of the section also. The word ‘shamilat’ has to be read with all
four­ ‘taraf’, ‘patti’, ‘panna’ and ‘thola’. A land can be ‘shamilat
deh’ only if it is ‘shamilat taraf’, ‘shamilat patti’, ‘shamilat panna’,
or ‘shamilat thola’. In case the word shamilat is missing from any
of these four terms, then the land cannot be said to be belonging
to a group of people and could never become ‘shamilat deh’ land.
12.

The purpose of the section which defines ‘shamilat deh’ is

that the land described as ‘shamilat’, ‘taraf’, ‘patti’, ‘panna’ and
‘thola’ not used for the benefit of the village community will not
9

be treated as ‘shamilat deh’.
identical.

Clause (3) of Section 2(g) is

The purpose is that the land which is described in

revenue records as ‘shamilat’, ‘taraf’, ‘patti’, ‘panna’ and ‘thola’
and used for the benefit of the entire village community or a part
thereof only would vest in the village proprietary body.

The

words ‘part thereof’ have been used with a specific purpose in the
background of the meaning of patti which we have dealt with in
detail above. Even if the land is being utilised for the common
purpose of the inhabitants of that ‘taraf’, ‘patti’, ‘panna’ and
‘thola’, it would be ‘shamilat deh’ even if it is not used for the
benefit of the entire village.

However, if the land is not used

either for the benefit of the entire village or for the part of the
village community which comprises the patti then the land, in
our opinion, cannot be said to be ‘shamilat deh’ land within the
meaning of Section 2(g).

13.

From the revenue records produced, we find that the land

has been shown as ‘Shamlat Patti Dhera & Khubi’.

‘Dhera &

Khubi’ are the ancestors of the appellant(s). The possession is
10

shown as that of proprietors/self­cultivators and an entry was
made in favour of the Panchayat Deh in 1987­1988. The land
was always shown to be ‘Shamlat Patti Dhera & Khubi’ and in the
cultivation of the appellant(s) or his ancestors.

Moreover, the

land was never shown to be used for the benefit of the entire
village community or even for a part of the community.

14.

In view of the above, we have no hesitation in holding that

the land cannot be described as ‘Shamilat Deh’ and, therefore,
would not vest in the village proprietary body. Accordingly, we
allow the appeal and set aside the judgment of the High Court
dated 03.07.2008 and the orders of all the authorities below. The
name of the appellant(s) be entered in the column of ownership
with the entry ‘shamlat patti’.

15.

Pending application(s), if any, shall stand(s) disposed of. No

order as to costs.
11

……………………………..J.
(L. Nageswara Rao)

…………………………….J.
(Deepak Gupta)
New Delhi
March 04, 2020

12

