for educational use only
1

NON­REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1930 OF 2019
Ananta Kamilya

.. Appellant
Versus

State of West Bengal

.. Respondent

JUDGMENT

M. R. Shah, J.
Feeling

aggrieved

and

dissatisfied

with

the

impugned

judgment and order dated 14.03.2017 passed by the High Court of
Calcutta in Criminal Appeal No. 8 of 2013, by which the High Court
has dismissed the said appeal preferred by the appellant­accused

Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
MEENAKSHI KOHLI
Date: 2020.01.07
15:04:02 IST
Reason:

and affirmed the conviction of the accused for the offence

2

punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code (for short
‘the IPC’), the convicted accused has preferred the present appeal.
2.

At the outset, it is required to be noted that this Court issued

limited notice in the present appeal so as to consider whether the
case would fall under Section 304 IPC.
3.

Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the accused has

vehemently submitted that there was no intention on the part of the
accused to cause the very injury which ultimately led to the death
of the deceased.
3.1

It is further submitted by the learned Counsel appearing on

behalf of the appellant that there was a single injury inflicted on the
deceased after some altercation. It is submitted that there was no
premeditation or intention to kill.

It is submitted that even the

accused did not bring any weapon/lathi and on the spur of the
moment and during the altercation, he caused the injury on the
deceased by lathi which was lying there.

It is submitted that

therefore the offence committed does not amount to murder in view
of Exception 4 to Section 300 IPC.

It is further submitted by

3

Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the accused that even the
deceased was taken to different hospitals and he died after a period
of seven days. Making above submissions it is prayed to set aside
the conviction for the offence punishable under Section 304 IPC
and to convert the same into either Section 304 Part I or Section
304 Part II of the IPC.
4.

Ms. Soumya Chakraborty, Learned Senior Advocate appearing

on behalf of the respondent­State while supporting the impugned
judgment and order passed by the High Court has vehemently
submitted that the injury caused by the accused has been proved to
be fatal.

It is submitted that even in the case of a single blow,

considering the nature of the injury and if the single blow is caused
on the vital part of the body, it would be a case under Section 302
IPC considering Exception 4 to Section 300 IPC.

Therefore, it is

prayed to dismiss the appeal.
5.

Heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respective

parties at length.

4

6.

At the outset, it is required to be noted that the only question

which is posed for consideration of this Court is whether in the
facts and circumstances of the case, the case would fall under
Section 302 IPC or Section 304 of the IPC? From the perusal of the
record and even the findings recorded by the learned Trial Court
and the High Court, it appears that the incident has taken place on
the spur of the moment. It has also come on record that when the
accused came to the place of the incident, he did not carry any lathi
and/or any other weapon. It was only after some altercation and on
the spur of the moment, the accused gave a lathi blow on the head
of the deceased and the deceased sustained the injury and there
was a fracture on his head. Despite fracture injury on his head, the
deceased was conscious. The deceased was first taken to the police
station.

Thereafter, he was taken to Patashpur Public Health

Center; thereafter he was taken to another hospital – Egra Hospital
for better treatment; thereafter he was transferred to Midnapur
(Paschim) Hospital; thereafter he was shifted to P.G. Hospital,
Kolkata. After a few days, he was removed to Ramchandra Bhanja
Medical College, Cuttack, Orissa and thereafter he died.

5

6.1

The aforesaid shows the gravity of injury. It is true that the

deceased died because of the injuries caused by the accused.
However, as observed above, the incident had taken place on the
spur of the moment and after some altercation the accused took the
lathi which was lying there and caused the injury on the head of the
deceased. There does not appear any intention on the part of the
accused to cause the very injury which ultimately led to the death
of the deceased. There does not appear to be any premeditation or
intention to kill the deceased. The death resulted due to injury in
quarrel. Therefore, the case would fall under Exception 4 to Section
300 IPC.
6.2

Going by the injury sustained by the deceased and having

regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, in our opinion,
the offence committed by the appellant, at the most, comes under
Part I of Section 304 IPC. The offence committed does not amount
to murder.
7.

In view of the reasons stated hereinabove, we set aside the

conviction of the appellant under Section 302 IPC and find him

6

guilty under Section 304 Part I IPC and sentence him to undergo
imprisonment for 10 years.

The appellant shall undergo the

remaining period of sentence.
The appeal is partly allowed to the aforesaid extent.

……..…………………..J.
(ASHOK BHUSHAN)

…………………………..J.
(M. R. SHAH)
New Delhi;
January 7, 2020.

